
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74836 ***


  [Illustration:

    _British Museum_

  MEXICO

  HUMAN SKULL, INCRUSTED WITH MOSAIC, REPRESENTING
  TEZCATLIPOCA]




                                MEXICAN
                              ARCHÆOLOGY

                   AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ARCHÆOLOGY
                       OF THE MEXICAN AND MAYAN
                 CIVILIZATIONS OF PRE-SPANISH AMERICA.
                  BY THOMAS A. JOYCE, M.A. WITH MANY
                        ILLUSTRATIONS AND A MAP

    [Illustration]

                     NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS

                       LONDON: PHILIP LEE WARNER

                               MDCCCCXIV




                         _By the same Author_:

                            SOUTH AMERICAN
                              ARCHÆOLOGY




                                PREFACE


The object of this small book is to summarize shortly the extent of
our knowledge concerning the life and culture of the Mexican and
Maya peoples of pre-Spanish America. It has no pretence whatever
to finality; indeed, the time is not within sight when a complete
elucidation of all the problems connected with this most fascinating
area can be put forward. At the same time it is useful to pause
occasionally and summarize results, if only because attention is
thereby drawn to the more serious gaps in the data available, and
it becomes easier to direct the course of future investigations. An
ulterior motive lies in the hope that a little stimulus may be given to
American studies in this country, which have languished sadly during
the past few years. This fact is all the more to be regretted since
Englishmen, such as Dr. A. P. Maudslay, have done so much in the past
to unveil the mysteries of ancient American civilization, and the
collection at the British Museum, though small, is rich in the finest
collection in the world of Mexican mosaics. At present, as far as the
Old World is concerned, the torch has passed to Germany, the labours of
whose investigators, in particular of Dr. Seler, have done so much to
place the study of American antiquities upon a thoroughly scientific
footing. No part of the world, perhaps, has formed the subject of
so many wild theories as ancient Mexico, and few present so many
fascinating riddles to the expert. It has therefore been impossible
in the present work to keep clear of controversial ground, but I have
tried as far as possible to take a sane view of each problem, and
to indicate in some measure the evidence for each conclusion. Many
of the suggested solutions are purely tentative, and must doubtless
be modified in the light of subsequent investigations. This remark
applies especially to the scheme of dating which forms an appendix. I
am quite prepared to be accused of rashness in presenting it, and I
admit that it is purely provisional. But I think it may have its use
as a frame-work for history, and it will at least serve the purpose of
exciting criticism. Subsequent to its preparation a monograph on “Maya
Art,” by Dr. Spinden, has made its appearance under the auspices of
the Peabody Museum in America, in which the author provides a somewhat
similar scheme. His table differs somewhat from mine, but I think that
the reasons for my dating, which I give in the last chapter, render
mine the more satisfactory, and I have therefore made no alteration.
His full treatment of Maya art has however led me to curtail my remarks
on that subject, since much of what I had written appears on his pages;
and I have rather given emphasis to those points of difference which
exist between us.

My original intention was to include in the present book a sketch of
the archæology of Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Panama, but the material
proved too great, and I have thought it better to deal thoroughly with
the related cultures of the Mexicans and Maya rather than to give an
incomplete or over-compressed picture of the archæology of a wider
area. Even as it is I fear that certain chapters may have suffered
from over-condensation, more especially that on the Mexican gods.
However Mexican religion is in itself rather an intricate subject,
and requires studying in considerable detail if a proper view of the
life and culture of the people is to be obtained. Religion amongst the
Mexicans was the mainspring of all private and public life, and few of
the archæological remains cannot be brought into direct relation with
it. Yet even Mexican religion is not as complicated as it appears at
first sight; it is in reality the language, with its fondness for long
compound names, which renders it so difficult a study to the amateur in
the initial stages. I had also intended to add a bibliographical note,
similar to that with which I concluded my volume on South America. But
in view of the existence of an admirable bibliography in Dr. Walter
Lehmann’s little monograph, “Methods and Results in Mexican Research,”
I judged it unnecessary.

I find it difficult to express to the full my thanks to the many
friends whose encouragement and assistance are really responsible for
such success as this book may achieve. Without the work of Dr. Maudslay
and Dr. Seler its production would have been impossible, and I owe
them both much gratitude for the great generosity which has led them
both to place their illustrations at my disposal. Professor Holmes,
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, has shown me similar kindness in
permitting me to reproduce five of the charming illustrations in his
admirable monograph, “Archæological Studies among the Ruined Cities
of Mexico,” published by the Field Columbian Museum (now the Field
Museum of Natural History) of Chicago. I am also deeply indebted to
Sir Hercules Read, to Colonel Ward and to Mr. Cooper Clark for much
advice and the use of valuable photographs, and also to the Trustees of
the British Museum and the Director of the Peabody Museum for the loan
of certain illustrations. To Dr. Wallis Budge I owe much for his kind
encouragement; it is in fact to him that the inception of the present
work is due. I must also express my gratitude to my wife for many hours
spent in the preparation of line-drawings, and to my colleague, Mr. H.
J. Braunholtz, of the British Museum, for assistance in the laborious
task of proof reading. Finally I should like to thank my publishers for
the consideration which they have always extended to me, as well as for
their enterprise in producing a series of archæological works which
will, I trust, do much to stimulate interest in the efforts of the
present to unveil the past.

                                                         T. A. JOYCE.

    LONDON,
      _January, 1914_




                               CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                                     PAGE

          INTRODUCTION                                             1

       I. MEXICO: TRIBAL HISTORY                                   5

      II. MEXICO: THE GODS                                        31

     III. MEXICO: THE CALENDAR AND CALENDRICAL FEASTS             59

      IV. MEXICO: WRITING, PRIESTHOOD, MEDICINE AND BURIAL        86

       V. MEXICO: SOCIAL SYSTEM, WAR, TRADE AND JUSTICE          109

      VI. MEXICO: CRAFTS, DRESS AND DAILY LIFE                   134

     VII. MEXICO: ARCHITECTURAL REMAINS AND POTTERY              169

    VIII. THE MAYA: HISTORY                                      199

      IX. THE MAYA: RELIGION AND MYTH                            218

       X. THE MAYA: THE CALENDAR, CALENDRICAL FEASTS AND MINOR
            RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES                                245

      XI. THE MAYA: BURIAL, SOCIAL SYSTEM, TRADE AND WAR         275

     XII. THE MAYA: DRESS, DAILY LIFE AND CRAFTS                 294

    XIII. THE MAYA: ARCHITECTURAL REMAINS                        319

     XIV. CONCLUSIONS                                            355

          APPENDIX I. NAMES OF THE DAYS IN THE MEXICAN
            AND MAYAN CALENDARS                                  372

          APPENDIX II. NAMES OF THE MONTHS IN THE MEXICAN
            AND MAYAN CALENDARS                                  373

          INDEX                                                  375




                             ILLUSTRATIONS


                           PLATE IN COLOURS

    PLATE

        I. Mexico: Human Skull, incrusted with mosaic,
             representing Tezcatlipoca                   _Frontispiece_


                          PLATES IN HALF-TONE
                                                           FACING PAGE

        II. Mexico: Colossal Stone Head of Coyolxauhqui
              Stone Figure of Chalchiuhtlicue                        22

       III. Mexico: Colossal Stone Figure of Coatlicue               30

        IV. Mexico: Stone Mask representing Xipe                     38

         V. Mexico: Stone Figure of Xochipilli                       42
                    Stone with Figure of a Xiuhcoatl                 42

        VI. Mexico: Sculptured Stone Vase                            50
                    Stone Figure of Quetzalcoatl                     50

       VII. Mexico: Stone Quauhxicalli                               66
                    Stone Quauhxicalli in the form of an Ocelot      66

      VIII. Mexico: The “Calendar Stone”                             74
                    Stone Figure of an Octli God                     74

        IX. Mexico: Objects in Pottery                               82
            Maya: Pottery Figurines from Graves                      82

         X. Huaxtec: Stone Figure and Chest                         108
            Maya: Pottery Censer                                    108

        XI. Mexico: Stone Rattle-snake and Jadeite Head             140
            Maya: Jadeite Reliefs                                   140
            Mixtec: Jadeite Relief                                  140
            Zapotec: Gold Lip-pendant                               140

       XII. Mexico: Mounds at San Juan Teotihuacan                  170

      XIII. Mexico: Temple at Xochicalco, Present Condition
              and Restoration                                       172

       XIV. Zapotec: Interior of Chamber at Mitla                   174
            Mexico: Temple at Tepoztlan                             174

        XV. Zapotec: Ruins at Mitla, partly restored                178

       XVI. Totonac: Temple at Papantla                             182

      XVII. Mexico: Spear-thrower, _atlatl_                         188
            Tarascan: Pottery from Guadalajara                      188
            Zapotec: Funerary Vases                                 188

     XVIII. Mexico: Stone Sacrificial Knife                         194
            Totonac: Pottery from the Id. of Sacrificios            194

       XIX. Totonac: Pottery from the Id. of Sacrificios            198

        XX. Maya: Stela 14, Piedras Negras                          226

       XXI. Maya: Stela H, Copan                                    236

      XXII. Maya: Stone Lintel, Menché                              294

     XXIII. Maya: Stela 24, Naranjo                                 302

       XXV. Maya: Building at Sayil                                 332
                  Temple at Tikal                                   332

      XXVI. Maya: Sculptured Monolith P., Quirigua                  338
                  Plan of Ruins at Copan                            338

     XXVII. Maya: Ruins at Palenque                                 342

    XXVIII. Maya: Temple of the Ball-court, and “Castillo,”
                    Chichen Itza                                    348

      XXIX. Maya: Restoration of Ball-court Temple                  350
                  Building of the “Monjas” Group                    350

       XXX. Maya: The “House of the Governor,” Uxmal                358


                             PLATE IN LINE

      XXIV. Maya: Design on a Pottery Vase                          310


                       ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT

    FIGURE                                                         PAGE

     1. Map of the Valley of Mexico                                  13

     2. The Aztec migration (Boturini MS.)                           15

     3. Various Mexican deities, from MSS.                           34

     4. Various Mexican deities, from MSS.                           35

     5. Mexican methods of sacrifice (Zouche MS.)                    41

     6. The moon (Borgia MS.)                                        52

     7. Mexican day-signs (Fejérváry-Mayer MS.)                      60

     8. Key to the Mexican Calendar Stone                            74

     9. Mexican priests making fire (Zouche MS.)                     75

    10. Tree of the West (Borgia MS.)                                79

    11. Stone relief from Huilocintla                                83

    12. Detail from the Telleriano-Remensis MS.                      87

    13. Plan of the palace at Tezcoco                                89

    14. Mexican mummies prepared for burial                         104

    15. Stone relief from Tlacolula                                 106

    16. Stone relief from Guerrero                                  107

    17. Mexican warriors (Mendoza MS.)                              113

    18. Articles of tribute (Mendoza MS.)                           118

    19. Mexican stone and obsidian implements                       135

    20. Mexican stone axes                                          137

    21. Totonac stone “yoke”                                        139

    22. Mixtec stone figurines                                      140

    23. Mexican artisans (Mendoza MS.)                              143

    24. Gold finger-ring                                            145

    25. Mexican feather-work mantle                                 146

    26. Spindle-whorls, Id. of Sacrificios                          147

    27. Mexican wood-carver and weaver (Mendoza MS.)                148

    28. Mexican pottery stamps                                      150

    29. The education of Mexican children (Mendoza MS.)             161

    30. _Tlaxtli_-court (Bodleian MS.)                              165

    31. Mexican _teponaztli_ (wooden gong)                          167

    32. Plans of remains at Quiengola                               175

    33. Slab from Xochicalco: beaker and stone head from Oaxaca     176

    34. Plan of one of the courts at Mitla                          177

    35. Portion of fresco at Mitla                                  179

    36. Pottery forms                                               185

    37. Painted designs on pottery                                  186

    38. Pottery vase from Teotihuacan                               187

    39. Vase in Tlaxcalan or Cholulan style                         190

    40. Pottery vase from Tlaxcala                                  191

    41. Design on a vase from Cuicatlan                             192

    42. Pottery vase from Tanquian                                  196

    43. Pottery vase from the Panuco River                          197

    44. Pottery vase from Tampico                                   198

    45. Linguistic Map of Maya tribes                               201

    46. Various Maya deities (Dresden MS.)                          222

    47. Various Maya deities (Dresden MS.)                          223

    48. Carved wooden lintel from Tikal                             225

    49. Relief, Temple of the Foliated Cross, Palenque              230

    50. The “two-headed monster,” Copan                             233

    51. Detail from relief, Temple of the Cross, Palenque           235

    52. Maya ceremonial axes, from the monuments                    237

    53. Maya day-signs; monuments and MSS.                          247

    54. Maya month-signs; monuments and MSS.                        250

    55. Maya period-signs; monuments                                251

    56. Maya date-inscriptions; monuments                           253

    57. Maya world-direction and colour signs                       256

    58. Maya new-year ceremonies (Dresden MS.)                      264

    59. Maya new-year ceremonies (Troano-Cortesianus MS.)           265

    60. Detail from relief at Chichen Itza                          289

    61. Man in ceremonial costume, Palenque                         297

    62. Maya methods of hunting (Troano-Cortesianus MS.)            299

    63. Maya priests with musical instruments (Dresden MS.)         301

    64. Objects of flaked stone, British Honduras                   305

    65. Stone mask; British Honduras                                306

    66. Maya weavers (Troano-Cortesianus MS.)                       307

    67. Bat-design, from a vase; Uloa Valley                        311

    68. Pottery vase from Chama                                     312

    69. Pottery vase from Ococingo                                  312

    70. Pottery vase from Coban                                     313

    71. Pottery censer from Nebaj                                   314

    72. Pottery head from Nebaj                                     316

    73. Examples of Maya terraces and pyramids                      321

    74. Section of typical Yucatec building                         323

    75. Examples of Maya buildings                                  325

    76. Ground-plans and elevations of Maya temples                 327

    77. Section through the Temple of the Cross, Palenque           329

    78. Plans of building at Santa Rosa Xlabpak                     330

    79. Detail of fresco at Santa Rita                              335

    80. Details of frescoes at Santa Rita and Mitla                 336

    81. Stone altar at Copan                                        339

    82. Relief, Temple of the Sun, Palenque                         344

    83. The “Monjas,” Chichen Itza                                  347

    84. Caryatid figure, Chichen Itza                               348

    85. Stone gargoyle, Copan                                       353

    86. Details from various monuments, showing the interlaced
          head-ornament                                             357

    87. Stone relief at Chichen Itza                                367


                                 MAPS

        Map of the Valley of Mexico (Fig. 1)                         13

        Linguistic Map of Maya Tribes (Fig. 45)                     201

        Mexico and Central America                      _Folder at end_




                          Mexican Archæology




                             INTRODUCTION


Ancient Mexico, the Aztec city of Tenochtitlan, built upon an island
situated in a great highland lake, the scene of the almost incredible
exploits of Cortés, has long been familiar as a name to the western
world, chiefly owing to the wonderful account compiled by Prescott. The
story of the fall of Aztec civilization before the Spanish invaders has
deservedly won a great hold upon popular imagination, for every page is
redolent of romance, and indeed few, if any, writers of fiction have
conceived a tale so full of incident, or have brought their heroes to
victory in the face of greater odds. Moreover, the existence of Aztec
civilization, an organized empire with cities built of stone and rich
in gold and gems, burst upon the Old World as a thing almost beyond
belief.

The purpose of the present work is to afford some connected account of
this pre-Spanish culture, and to correlate the accounts of eyewitnesses
and early visitors with the material remains which the investigations
of later times have revealed. But in order to obtain a proper view
of Mexican culture it is necessary to transcend the limits of Mexico
itself. In the country to the south and east, in Guatemala and
northern Honduras, are the remains of ruined buildings which are, both
architecturally and artistically, superior to those of Mexico proper,
and which had been deserted before the coming of the Spaniards. These
were the work of the Maya, a people whose name is far less familiar
to the general public than that of the Aztec, but who, as I hope to
show, evolved a culture of their own when the Aztec were yet primitive
nomadic hunters, and who furnished the latter people with the materials
for that civilization which so astonished the followers of Cortés.

The actual area with which this book deals is, roughly, that portion of
Mexico which lies between the tropic of Cancer and the northern strip
of Honduras. It is divided naturally into two portions, a northern
and western, and a southern and eastern, by the depression which cuts
across the isthmus of Tehuantepec. The natural division corresponds
very conveniently with the archæological; to the north and west lies
the seat of Mexican culture, to the south and east, of the Mayan; but
it must be remembered that the Maya-speaking people extended at the
conquest practically throughout Vera Cruz, though they had by that time
fallen under Aztec influence. I propose therefore to divide this book
into two corresponding sections, dealing first with the “Mexican” area,
and later with the “Mayan.” Both from the chronological and cultural
points of view the Mayan area should come first, but, as will appear
later, we are dependent to so great an extent upon our knowledge of
Mexican civilization for our interpretation of Mayan archæology, that
it will be more convenient to give the Mexican priority.

The main geographical features of the Maya country are given at the
commencement of the section dealing with its archæology. The region
immediately under consideration is shaped rather like an inverted
pear, and consists in the main of a plateau bordered by two converging
chains of lofty mountains, which are skirted exteriorly by a strip of
low-lying coast. The uniformity of the plateau is broken in many places
by steep ravines, or _barrancas_, formed by the slow action of
rivers, and by occasional highland lakes, such as Chapala, Pazcuaro and
Mexico. Much of the ground is volcanic, and the names of the volcanoes
Popocatepetl and Iztacciuatl in Mexico province, and of Orizaba on the
Puebla-Vera Cruz border, are familiar to everyone. The Mexican valley
forms the apex of the triangular plateau, and the natural route thence
to the south lies _via_ Tehuacan and Teotitlan del Camino, a
fact which should be kept in mind in studying the tribal migrations.
The height of the mountain-chains and their proximity to the coast
explain the fact that there are but few important rivers in Mexico;
most of the streams on the plateau drain into land-locked basins, and
practically the only rivers which pierce the mountain barrier are the
Panuco on the east, and the Lerma and Rio de las Balsas on the west.
Climate and vegetation are dependent upon elevation; the coast is
tropical, but the elevation is so abrupt that the traveller passes with
remarkable rapidity from palms, bananas, coconuts and rubber, according
to locality, to slopes clad with fir and oak and plains of wheat and
maize. In the same way, table-lands rise in successive terraces from
Tehuantepec through Oaxaca and Puebla to Mexico which has an elevation
of nearly 7500 feet above the sea-level, and enjoys a more temperate
climate than New York or Chicago fourteen to sixteen hundred miles
further north. The country is conveniently divided into three zones,
according to its elevation; the so-called “tierra caliente” (hot
country) runs from the sea-level to 3000 feet, the “tierra templada”
(temperate country) from 3000 to 6000 feet, and the “tierra fria” (cold
country) thence to the 9000 foot level. The most important vegetable
product from the economic point of view was maize, which constituted
the chief food of the natives. The varieties and development of
the maize-plant as we know it imply centuries of settled life and
patient cultivation, and it is an interesting fact that for years
the identity of the wild plant from which it was produced remained
a mystery. Other plants of economic importance were cacao, vanilla,
tobacco and cotton, grown in the hot regions, and the agave or Mexican
aloe which flourishes also in the higher country. The fauna includes
jaguar (“tiger”), puma (“lion”), ocelot, deer, peccary, alligator,
rattle-snake, turkey, humming-bird and the quetzal, the beautiful
plumes of the latter being one of the most highly-prized articles of
adornment. The distribution of these animals is not however constant
throughout the whole area, but many of them are confined to the warmer
countries. Little more need be said, for the purposes of this book,
of the physical nature of the country, save that the rainfall is not
excessive, being heaviest upon the Atlantic slope; and that, while the
land appears to be rising gradually on the Pacific side, much has been
lost to the Atlantic on the east. With these few words of introduction
an attempt will now be made to describe the inhabitants of the country
and the culture which they built up before they came in contact with
the Old World at the beginning of the sixteenth century.[1]




                   CHAPTER I--MEXICO: TRIBAL HISTORY


At the time of the conquest by the Spaniards of the province of Mexico,
the dominant people was the Aztec population of Tenochtitlan (Mexico
city), inhabiting a town built on an island in the lake of Tezcoco, or
rather that portion of it known as the lake of Mexico. The Aztec were
confessedly immigrants, who had wandered south less than five hundred
years before the conquest; by their superiority as fighting-men they
had won the hegemony over the kindred tribes which they found settled
in the valley of Mexico, and had extended their power to both oceans
and as far at least as the isthmus of Tehuantepec. Both they and their
immediate predecessors spoke the same language, called Nahua (strictly,
_Nahuatl_), and they appear to be a branch of the great Shoshonean
family which reaches as far north as the state of Montana. Beyond
this, their ethnography and language would seem to connect them rather
with the coastal tribes of the far north-west than with those to the
east of the Rockies, but on this point little can be said at present.
Immediately to the north and north-west of the settled peoples of the
valley, the steppe country was inhabited by tribes who lived mainly by
hunting, called Chichimec and Otomi, the former being almost purely
nomadic, the latter to some extent settled. The Chichimec spoke for
the most part a language which was essentially Nahua, but the name
itself possessed for the Mexicans rather a cultural than a linguistic
significance, and meant little more than “nomadic hunters.” The Otomi
tongue was different, and extended down to the valley of Toluca,
through the people known as Mazaua to the Matlatzinca. South of the
last, among the Tlalhuica around Cuernavaca, Nahua again prevailed. In
the hilly volcanic country around lakes Pazcuaro and Chapala, a third
speech was found, the Tarascan, of which the exact affinities are still
doubtful. The Rio de las Balsas appears to be about the southern limit
of the Tarascan tongue, but its northern is less certain; it extends
into Jalisco, and may at one time have reached up into Zacatecas where
remains in Tarascan style have been discovered (at La Quemada). Roughly
south of the Rio de las Balsas and a line drawn thence to Teotitlan is
the Mixtec-Zapotec group of tongues; the Mixtec extending from Acatlan
to Tototepec, and the Zapotec to the east, from the Nahua-speaking
Teotitlan to Tehuantepec, the Mazatec occupying the northern portion
of this strip. The Mixtec-Zapotec language bears many structural
analogies to the Otomi group mentioned above. Along the east coast,
from the Panuco valley southward, were two peoples, speaking dialects
of yet another language, the Maya tongue. In the north were the
Huaxtec, primitive Maya, extending as far south as Tuxpan, where they
were in touch with the linguistically related Totonac. To the north
they stretched beyond the Panuco, but the remains of this region are
practically unknown. There is evidence too that they once extended far
further west than they did at the conquest, but the expansion of the
Nahua had penned them up in the narrow strip of coast, and an Aztec
fortress was established as far east as Meztitlan to keep the border.
The Totonac, inhabiting Vera Cruz to the south, had suffered similarly
from Mexican encroachment, and the river Nautla formed a strip of Aztec
territory which almost severed their country in two. At the time of the
conquest their principal centres were Papantla and Zacapoaxtla. East
of them, in Coatzacoalcos and Tabasco, were the peoples known to the
Mexicans as Olmec, Xicalanca and Nonoualca, who, according to legend,
were once settled in the neighbourhood of Tlaxcala, but were driven
thence by the historical Tlaxcalans when they immigrated into the
country.

The early history of these tribes is very difficult to elucidate from
the tangled mass of migration myths, often contradictory, which have
survived. What may be termed the historical period starts only with the
election of the first Aztec king, some years after the settlement of
the tribe at Tenochtitlan, and this takes us back only to about 1376,
or not much more than a century before the Spanish conquest. The Aztec,
when they arrived, found a number of Nahua-speaking “Chichimec” in
occupation of the valley, and these “Chichimec” had themselves found
the remains of a culture far above their own, to which they gave the
name of Toltec. Now the “Toltec question” has been hotly debated from
early times; to the Mexicans the Toltec were the people of a golden
age, and their state was the prototype of peaceful civilization.
Some writers have gone so far as to deny them actual existence at
all, regarding them as a purely mythical people to whom the Mexicans
conveniently attributed the invention of all useful arts of which
they could not readily explain the evolution otherwise. Others have
exalted their culture to a pitch far above, one might almost say, the
human, and have credited them with a knowledge transcending that of
latter-day civilization. I do not propose to plunge into the welter
of controversial theories, but to regard the matter from a strictly
practical point of view, which seems to me to be as follows. The Aztec
and their immediate fore-runners the “Chichimec” were merely nomadic
hunters when they settled in the valley, and their knowledge of arts
and crafts, which need a settled life for development, had not advanced
beyond a very primitive stage. They found the remains of a people
who had for years been living as settled agriculturists, and ruined
cities which their untutored minds regarded as something bordering on
the marvellous. The agricultural population whom they subdued, more
cultured but less warlike than they, told them stories of a powerful
empire, stories which no doubt lost nothing in the telling. To this
empire they gave the name of Toltec, from the city of Tulan (or Tollan)
which was its reputed centre. Modern research has proved conclusively
the existence, at those very localities especially associated with the
Toltec, of pre-Aztec ruins, and of a relatively high culture which
prevailed throughout the valley (and beyond) for a period considerably
longer than that which elapsed between the Aztec immigration and the
Spanish conquest. As a mere matter of evidence I cannot see that any
name can be given to this pre-Aztec culture other than that of Toltec,
and, further, that it is possible to deny at least a foundation in
fact to the myths connected with this people. However, even so, the
difficulties connected with the question are not entirely solved;
Sahagun states definitely that the Toltec spoke Nahua, and relates a
migration myth which brings them into contact with the Nahua peoples
before their settlement in Tulan. Another legend makes the founder
of their state a Chichimec, one Mixcoamazatzin, whose name bears a
strong resemblance to that of the Chichimec hunting-god, Mixcoatl,
compounded with the native word for the miraculous deer, mazatl, with
which he was associated. Further, excavation has proved that before
the “Toltec” culture, another of lower grade existed in the valley.
This culture, at present the earliest of which traces can be found,
strongly resembles that of the Tarascan, and it rather merges into that
of the Toltec, while the latter is separated from that of the later
Nahua by a definite line of demarcation. As far as the evidence goes
at present, it is fair to draw the conclusion that the first settled
agriculturists in the Mexican valley were of the same stock as the
agricultural people around lake Pazcuaro; that upon them descended a
Nahua tribe from the north, coming in sufficient strength to impose
their language, who built up a culture which surprised the subsequent
immigrants of similar race when, at a considerably later period, they
followed in their footsteps. The tendency of rude hunting tribes to
rapid development when they adopt settled life has not yet been fully
recognized. There is no finer training for the human faculties than the
pursuit of hunting; it hardens the body, sharpens the observation, and
engenders a perpetual readiness to meet sudden emergencies. Agriculture
on the other hand, while promoting the development of the useful
arts to a certain pitch, is apt to result in stagnation. Students of
African ethnography are well aware that nearly all the great kingdoms
which have bloomed from time to time in Central Africa have had their
origin in the descent of a nomadic tribe upon an agricultural, the
former becoming sedentary and developing the arts which they received
from the latter far beyond their previous limits. This point however
is rather by way of illustration, for it does not wholly suffice to
account for the Toltec civilization, though it helps to explain the
rapidity with which the Aztec assimilated and developed the remains of
it. The Toltec culture bears a definite relation to remains which occur
at many sites in Oaxaca and Yucatan, these again are closely connected
with the magnificent remains of the early Maya of Chiapas, Guatemala
and Honduras. The exact relationship existing between the Maya and the
Toltec can only be discussed after the archæology of the former has
been considered, but it may be stated in anticipation that, as far as
we can say at present, the finest Maya remains appear to antedate those
of the Toltec, and therefore that the development of Toltec culture is
in part due to Mayan inspiration filtered, I believe, through the early
inhabitants of the Zapotec country.

The consideration of what may be called the mythical period of Mexican
history is rendered all the more difficult by the fact that all the
legends have been collected among later immigrants who wished as
far as possible to trace some connection between themselves and the
earlier settlers. Toltec descent, if it could be established, raised a
family at once to a patrician status, and most of the immigrant tribes
sought their rulers among the descendants of a Toltec house. There is
therefore the danger of fictitious genealogies, such as exist among
so many Sudanese tribes desirous of proving “Arab” descent; but apart
from this we are confronted at the outset with a difficulty which is
not easy of solution. Sahagun states that the first inhabitants, the
Toltec, the other Nahua, the Olmec and the Michoacans, arrived at the
Panuco valley and worked down the east coast before turning inland.
Ixtlilxochitl represents the Toltec as coasting down lower California
and Jalisco. Of the two writers Sahagun is by far the more trustworthy,
but at the same time it is difficult to see what Ixtlilxochitl had to
gain by deliberately transferring the scene of the migration from one
coast to the other. The story of Sahagun is, in brief, as follows. The
migrants penetrated as far as Guatemala, and then settled for a time
at a place called Tamoanchan, mention of which occurs in nearly all
migration legends. Here the wise men who led them departed, taking
the god under whose guidance they travelled and the picture-writings
which contained their lore, and sailing eastward over the sea. The
rest remained behind, under the governance of certain lesser sages, of
whom the chief were Oxomoco and Cipactonal, “awaiting the dawn for the
administration of society.” The Olmec also split from the main stem
at this point. From here the others went to Xomiltepec, and then to
Teotihuacan, a site remarkable for extensive pre-Aztec ruins, where
they elected rulers, and then to Coatepec, where the Otomi branched
off. Later the tribes who still remained associated foregathered at
Chicomoztoc, another locality mentioned in nearly all the myths, where
they established cave-temples. Hence the Toltec departed to Tulanzinco,
and subsequently to Tulan; after they had separated, the Tarascans
also split off, finding their way to Michoacan. Later still the
Nahua, including the Tepanec (founders of Azcapotzalco), the Acolhua
(of Tezcoco), and the eventual populations of Chalco, Uexotzinco and
Tlaxcala respectively. The Aztec alone remained wandering in the
northern steppes until they too eventually reached the valley of
Mexico. It is hardly worth while entering into the details of Toltec
history as recorded subsequent to their settlement; the “Annals of
Quauhtitlan,” a native tradition of considerable age and value, gives
a list of five kings; Torquemada and Ixtlilxochitl furnish an entirely
different list, the latter mentioning one king in addition to those
quoted by Torquemada. All that need be said is that the Toltec were
ruled by priest-kings, representatives of their god Quetzalcoatl, who,
according to one legend, was their first ruler, and that the downfall
of their power was heralded by the separation of the temporal and
religious authority. The cause of that downfall seems to have been the
gradual incursion of later Nahua immigrants; signs of degeneration
are not wanting in the legends connected with the later reigns, in
particular the introduction of human sacrifice. At the fall of the
kingdom, a great emigration took place in the direction of the east,
to Tabasco and beyond, and, so the story tells, _via_ Tehuacan
and Teotitlan to Soconusco. Many of the Toltec however remained
behind, especially in Colhuacan, Cholula and Uexotzinco. The arrival
of the Tlaxcalans, which probably occurred about this time, drove
the Olmec further east in the path of the Toltec, with whom they
claimed to be one and the same people. No doubt however the Tlaxcalans
absorbed a large percentage of Toltec blood, a fact which intensified
their friendship for the people of Uexotzinco and their ineradicable
hostility to the Aztec. From a careful consideration of many points of
evidence, I am inclined to think that the date given by the “Annals of
Quauhtitlan” for the destruction of Tulan, viz. 1064, is not far wrong;
how long the state had lasted is more difficult to say, but that it
must have flourished for an extended period is obvious from the fact
that the remains characteristic of the Toltec culture at Azcapotzalco
form a stratum over three metres thick.

  [Illustration: FIG. 1.--Map of the Valley of Mexico.
  The black line shows the traditional route of the Aztec.]

Certain of the manuscripts give the ancient home of the Aztec as
Aztlan, and picture it as an island in the centre of a lake, with
a city called Colhuacan on the opposite shore. From here the Aztec
started in the year dated _1. tecpatl_ (“one stone knife,” i.e. 1168
A.D.), and at Colhuacan received their god, Uitzilopochtli, and joined
themselves to eight other related tribes. Five of these ultimately
formed the population of the following cities, chiefly in the Valley
of Mexico, Uexotzinco, Chalco, Xochimilco, Cuitlauac, Malinalco
(see the map of the Mexican Valley, Fig. 1); the others being the
Chichimec, Tepanec (founders of Azcapotzalco) and Matlatzinca. Later
they arrived at Tamoanchan, the “House of descent,” a word probably
meaning little more than the “place where the tribes separated,” for
here the eight tribes left them to continue their journey alone. Hence
they went to Chicomoztoc, and Cuextecatl Ichocayan, the “place where
the Huaxtec weep,” where they are represented as having made prisoners
from among this nation. After wandering in the steppes they came to
Tulan, and then to Chapultepec; and, after having been reduced for
some time to slavery in Colhuacan, settled finally in Tenochtitlan.
It is difficult to estimate the amount of authenticity which may be
attributed to this legend; the description of the ancient home seems
to reproduce the geographical position of Tenochtitlan, situated on
an island opposite a mainland town called Colhuacan, in a rather
suspicious manner. Still it seems to have been a habit of the Nahua
tribes to select such situations for their cities, in proof of which
one need only mention such towns as Zumpango, Xaltocan, Cuitlauac,
Xochimilco and Acocolco, a previous residence of the Aztec. Fig. 2
illustrates the portion of the Boturini codex which pictures the start
from Aztlan to Colhuacan, the footsteps indicating the route, and
the eight figures to the right accompanied by glyphs, representing
the eight tribes mentioned above, reading from bottom to top. The
situation of Aztlan, if the place is not entirely mythical, has given
rise to a good deal of controversy; some have identified Colhuacan
with Culiacan on the coast of Sinaloa, while Seler suggests that
it was in fact the historical city of that name, Aztlan being the
island of Acocolco whence the Mexicans were deported as slaves to
Colhuacan, a historical fact. The term Colhuan was in historical times
restricted to the inhabitants of this city, with whom the population of
Xochimilco and Malinalco were closely connected. Chicomoztoc figures
as a halting-place in practically all legends dealing with the Nahua
immigration, and in some it is regarded as the starting-point. Besides
the tribes above mentioned, the following are also represented as
having made some stay there: the Huaxtec, Olmec, Xicalanca, Totonac,
Michoacans, Tlalhuica, Acolhua (Tezcocans), Tlaxcalans, the inhabitants
of Teotitlan and Tehuacan, and the Mixtec. Beyond this we shall see
later that this place seems to be connected with the early history of
certain Maya tribes whose migration legends have been preserved. Indeed
it seems bound up with the mythical history of all the tribes of Mexico
and the greater part of Central America, with one striking exception,
the Zapotec, and as such must belong to an earlier movement of tribes
than the actual Aztec migration from Aztlan. The Nahua-speaking tribes,
including the Toltec, and the Michoacans, called themselves Chichimec,
a term which, as mentioned above, possesses rather a cultural than a
racial significance, and means wandering hunters. In fact the Aztec are
shown in manuscripts as skin-clad archers on their migration, fighting
with the inhabitants of the valley, who are represented as dressed in
textiles and armed with the macquauitl, or wooden sword edged with
obsidian. The first inroad of Chichimec after the destruction of Tulan
(though no doubt that destruction was caused, at any rate in part,
by the pressure of nomadic tribes from the north), is said to have
taken place under the leadership of a chief called Xolotl, coming
from a country named Amaquemacan _via_ Chicomoztoc and Tulan. Xolotl
established his court at Tenayocan, and proceeded to extend his power
over the other cities round the lake, incorporating such of the Toltec
as remained in his empire. Shortly after, another influx of Chichimec
took place, under three chiefs, Acolhuatzin, whose immediate followers
called themselves Tepanec, Chiconquauhtli, leading a band of Otomi,
and Tzontecomatl, chief of the Acolhua (in the narrower sense). These
chiefs allied themselves with Xolotl, and the first two were given
his two daughters in marriage, receiving at the same time the towns
of Azcapotzalco and Xaltocan respectively as residences. Tzontecomatl
married a woman from Chalco and established himself at Coatlichan.
Colhuacan at this time was ruled by Pochotl, a descendant of the last
Toltec king, and Xolotl seems to have exercised a loose suzerainty over
all. The invaders rapidly adopted the remains of civilization which
they found in the valley, and applied themselves to agriculture; the
old name of Chichimec was dropped, and that of Acolhua, in the wider
sense, was adopted. From this point historical tradition has been
so well reduced to order by Clavigero, whose work, translated into
English, is still easily accessible, that I do not propose to give more
than a mere summary of events. A list of the various “kings,” together
with approximate dates which I suggest after a careful comparison of
many sources, is given in Appendix III. The principal point to be noted
is the transfer of the political centre from Tenayocan to Tezcoco,
which took place in the reign of Xolotl’s third successor, Quinatzin,
who removed his “court” thither; from this point dates what may be
termed the “Acolhuan” domination of the Mexican valley. Meanwhile the
Aztec had arrived, but being the latest of the migrants they were
also the rudest, and were of little account. Even their prowess as
fighters was counterbalanced by the comparative smallness of their
numbers, and for years they lived under the protection of various
rulers who employed their services in the wars which had already begun
to break out between city and city. In the reign of Nopaltzin, Xolotl’s
successor, they are said to have been settled at Chapultepec, but,
being oppressed by the chief of Xaltocan, they removed to securer,
though less comfortable, quarters on the group of islands called
Acocolco at the south end of the lake. Here they remained for half a
century, until they were transferred to Colhuacan by the ruler of that
city. By this time their numbers had increased, while their fighting
qualities had not deteriorated, and after giving proof of the latter
fact by defeating the Xochimilca, with whom the Colhua were at war,
they felt their position sufficiently strong to insist on leaving
Colhuacan for Mexicaltzingo. Here however they did not reside for
long, but moved north first to Iztacalco and finally to Tenochtitlan.
Even yet they were not strong enough to stand entirely by themselves,
probably partly because they were not yet under a single chief who
could lay claim to kinship with the ruling houses of other cities, and
they were now under the protection of Azcapotzalco, to the ruler of
which they paid tribute. Not long after their settlement, dissensions
broke out among themselves, and certain clans removed to the small
island of Tlaltelolco adjoining Tenochtitlan on the north. The split
however was not final, and the two sections remained in close alliance,
though under separate administration. The question of the dates of
these various events is by no means easy to determine. Tenochtitlan,
according to the Mendoza codex, which gives a continuous chronicle from
this point, was founded in the year _2. calli_ (two house), or 1325,
and this date may, I believe, be taken as reasonably exact. We are
told that the Aztec were subject to Colhuacan for about twenty-five
years, and that they spent half a century before that on the islands
of Acocolco. If we allow about twenty years spent at Chapultepec and
in the migration from Colhuacan to Tenochtitlan, we get 1230 as the
approximate date of their arrival at the former city. At this time,
according to legend, Nopaltzin, the successor of Xolotl, was ruling at
Tenayocan, and the commencement of his reign cannot be put much earlier
than 1225, since we are told that Tlotzin, his successor (called
Huetzin by Ixtlilxochitl), died in the year in which Tenochtitlan was
founded. Xolotl, the founder of the “Chichimec” power, seems to have
reigned long, and indeed the Mexican rulers as a whole seem to have
been singularly long-lived. But in any case Xolotl cannot have led his
followers into the Mexican valley much before the second half of the
twelfth century. If the annals of Quauhtitlan are correct in assigning
the year 1064 to the destruction of Tulan, then the statement that
the Chichimec migration occurred some thirty years later must be an
error. It is true that if the statements of Sahagun as to the length of
the reigns of the Acolhuan and Chichimec kings be correct, the error
is not nearly so considerable, but in that case the association of
these kings with certain epochs of Mexican history becomes impossible.
I am inclined to believe that far more reliance is to be placed on
associations of this kind in tradition than upon mere numbers of years,
and it is possible that some mistake may have arisen between Sahagun
and his informants regarding the length of a king’s life on the one
hand and the length of his reign on the other. I have therefore given
premier importance to statements regarding associations in my scheme
of dates. Moreover it seems far more likely from several points of
view that at least a century must have intervened between the downfall
of Tulan and the immigration headed by Xolotl, though there must have
been a steady drift of “Chichimec” tribes southward during that period,
having its commencement before the former event, to which it no doubt
contributed.

  [Illustration:

   FIG. 2.--Detail from the Boturini MS., showing the
   commencement of the Aztec migration. From left to right: Aztlan
   on an island; the Aztec crossing the water; the date _1.
   tecpatl_; the city Colhuacan; eight other tribes, reading
   downwards, the Matlatzinca, Tepanec, Chichimec, Malinalca,
   Cuitlauaca, Xochimilca, Chalca, and Uexotzinca. (_After
   Seler_)]

For the first half-century after their establishment at Tenochtitlan,
the Aztec were ruled by a council, composed no doubt of the heads of
clans; but in the year 1376 they elected a king. Nothing illustrates
better the idea among the Mexicans that kingly power was inherent
in certain families, than the fact that they elected Acamapitzin,
whose mother was a daughter of the ruler of Colhuacan, Coxcoxtli,
and therefore of Toltec descent. Simultaneously the inhabitants of
Tlaltelolco elected a ruler, Quaquapitzauac, said to be connected with
the ruling family of Azcapotzalco. At this time the most powerful
cities in the valley were Tezcoco, whither Quinatzin had removed the
Acolhuan court, which was now ruled by his successor Techotlala;
Azcapotzalco, ruled by the Tepanec Tezozomoc, descended from
Acolhuatzin; Coatlichan, where a member of Tzontecomatl’s family held
sway; and Colhuacan, under the kingship of Coxcoxtli, of the race of
Pochotl the son of Topiltzin the last Toltec king.

Acamapitzin was followed in 1396 by Uitziliuitl, and he in 1417
by Chimalpopoca, Tlacateotl having succeeded to the rulership of
Tlaltelolco in 1406. Meanwhile Techotlala had died, and Ixtlilxochitl
had become ruler of Tezcoco about 1400. The Mendoza codex assigns
the conquest of certain cities to these kings, but it is probable
that in these expeditions they acted merely as allies of Tezcoco or
Azcapotzalco. During this period the power of Azcapotzalco began to
expand, and, aided by the Mexicans, Tezozomoc, the ruler of that
city, attacked Ixtlilxochitl of Tezcoco. The obstinate war which
followed was the commencement of the struggle between the Tepanec and
Acolhua for the hegemony of the valley, but for the time the latter
prevailed, and a hollow peace was made. This lasted but a short time,
and Ixtlilxochitl was eventually killed in an ambuscade by the Tepanec,
who had utilized the interval in winning over certain of his allies.
The Tepanec thus became masters of Tezcoco in 1418, and Nezahualcoyotl,
the legitimate heir, was driven into exile. Tezozomoc, the Tepanec
ruler, did not however enjoy his success long, but died about 1425 at
an advanced age. So old was he, it is related, that he was at last
kept in a basket surrounded with wool for warmth, and his final years
were embittered by dreams that Nezahualcoyotl in the form of an eagle
devoured his heart, or, as a lion, sucked his blood. His death brought
internal dissension upon Azcapotzalco; one of his younger sons, by name
Maxtla, assassinated the heir-designate and seized the power. He seems
to have been the most energetic of the members of the ruling house,
but lacked his father’s political wariness, since he began to quarrel
with Mexico. This was a fatal mistake, since it caused the Aztec,
secretly at first, to intrigue with the exiled Nezahualcoyotl, who had,
moreover, many friends among the cities where the Acolhuan element was
strong. In 1417 Itzcoatl succeeded to power in Tenochtitlan; the Aztec
had by this time increased considerably in numbers and prosperity, and
the new ruler proved himself a man of action and an excellent general.
He definitely espoused the cause of the exile, with the result that
the latter, aided by the people of Tlaxcala and Uexotzinco, succeeded
in recapturing Tezcoco and killing every Tepanec in the city. At the
same time Coatlichan was stormed by the Chalca, who had also offered
assistance to Nezahualcoyotl. These events brought matters to a head;
Maxtla, refusing peace, rashly sent an expedition against Tenochtitlan,
and the populace in terror wished to submit. But Itzcoatl succeeded in
inspiring them with courage, and, aided by Quauhtlatoa, who had just
been elected to the kingship of Tlaltelolco, they inflicted a signal
defeat upon the invading force. Nor was this all, Itzcoatl followed up
his success by attacking Azcapotzalco, which was successfully stormed
and Maxtla was killed. Meanwhile the forces of Tlaxcala and Uexotzinco
had captured Tenayocan, and the Tepanec domination was at an end. The
Aztec were now actually the paramount power in the valley, but Itzcoatl
was too wise to insist upon the fact. He recognized Nezahualcoyotl
as his equal, and contracted with him an alliance on equal terms, by
which means he won the support of the large Acolhua population. He
also conciliated the favour of the defeated Tepanec; Azcapotzalco,
it is true, was reduced to the level of a subordinate city, but over
Tlacopan, another Tepanec town, he placed Totoquiuatzin, a descendant
of Tezozomoc, as ruler and admitted him to the confederacy on the terms
that the booty which was won by the allied arms should be distributed
in the following proportions; to Tenochtitlan two-fifths, to Tezcoco
two-fifths, and to Tlacopan one-fifth. The one essential of power
Itzcoatl retained for himself; he stipulated that the military policy
of the allies should be directed from Tenochtitlan.

But if the political power was concentrated in Tenochtitlan, Tezcoco
under the wise rule of Nezahualcoyotl became the intellectual and
artistic centre of the valley. The government was reformed, and a code
of laws drawn up which was regarded as the pattern of all legislation;
schools were instituted for the study of poetry, astronomy, music
and painting, and the city was embellished by the construction of
temples and gardens. However the fall of the Tepanec did not bring
peace to the valley; many cities began to be jealous of the Aztec
and their newly-acquired hegemony, and the Mendoza codex gives a
list of cities which were conquered during the reign of Itzcoatl,
among them Quauhtitlan, Cuitlauac, Xochimilco, Chalco, and Quauhnauac
(Cuernavaca). Yet these “conquests” were not on the same scale as that
of Azcapotzalco; from this time forward the Aztec were content with
exacting merely a nominal submission from the towns which they subdued,
and imposing tribute. As long as the latter was paid punctually
no interference was made either with the local rulers or their
administration, though theoretically the heir of a “king” who died was
supposed to seek confirmation in his office at the hands of the ruler
of Tenochtitlan.

  [Illustration:

    _Photo. C. B. Waite_      _Mexico Museum_

  1]

  [Illustration:

    _British Museum_

  2

  MEXICO

  1. COLOSSAL STONE HEAD OF COYOLXAUHQUI

  2. STONE FIGURE OF CHALCHIUHTLICUE

  (Scale: 1, ¹⁄₂₅th; 2, ⅓rd)]

With the advent to the throne of Montecuzoma, the first of that
name, in 1440, the Aztec continued to extend their power beyond the
valley. After a short campaign against the Chalca, in order to obtain
prisoners to sacrifice at his coronation, this king proceeded to
attack the region around Cuernavaca, subduing, among other towns,
that of Tepoztlan, where a temple still remains inscribed with his
name (S.S.W. of Cuernavaca), Yauhtepec and Tlaxco (Pl. XIV, 2; p.
174). Further south, he conquered Coixtlahuaca in Mixtec territory,
but his operations to the east were more extensive. In 1458 he sent
an expedition into the Panuco valley, against the Huaxtec, and in
1461 he won Cotaxtla in the Totonac district, penetrating as far as
Cozomaloapan and overrunning also the region of Tuxpan. His foreign
conquests were not undisturbed by troubles in the valley, and the same
must be understood of the later rulers also. Revolt was frequent,
and encouraged rather than otherwise by the religious beliefs of the
Mexicans, as will be explained later. In particular those cities
which contained a large percentage of some formerly dominant people
were perpetually seceding, and among them Chalco and Xochimilco
were frequent offenders. To the east the population of Tlaxcala and
Uexotzinco were a perpetual thorn in the side of the Aztec, and were
never reduced to subjection. The Tlaxcalans in particular succeeded
in holding their own, and their hostility to Tenochtitlan, of more
than half a century’s duration, proved of inestimable value to the
Spaniards. This people, who as we have seen were of “Chichimec”
origin, had originally been settled on the east shore of the lake,
but, owing to quarrels with their neighbours, decided to move
their residence. A few went north and settled in Tulanzinco, but
the majority migrated east through Cholula to the region of Mount
Matlalcue, whence they drove the Olmec and Xicalanga. No doubt a
certain amount of intermingling took place between the peoples, and
it was partly the large infusion of Toltec blood which rendered them
so implacably hostile to Aztec rule, and usually on such good terms
with the Cholulans. With the Uexotzinca their relations were variable,
but more often friendly than not. As has been related, they assisted
in the overthrow of the Tepanec power, but the expansion of Mexico
under Montecuzoma was by no means to their liking, and friction soon
arose. With the Uexotzinca they assisted the northern Mixtec against
Montecuzoma, and succeeded at first in checking the Aztec advance in
this direction. However, in twenty-nine years Montecuzoma extended
the influence of Tenochtitlan, on the east to the Mexican gulf,
on the south-east and south to the northern portion of the Mixtec
territory and the Cuernavaca region, while on the west and north-west
he penetrated into the Toluca valley and the country of the Otomi.
At home he built the great Uitznauac temple and, on the advice of
Nezahualcoyotl, constructed the ten-mile causeway from Atzacoalco
to Iztapalapa in order to guard against inundation, besides adding
many buildings to the city and enlarging the code of laws. He died in
1469, preceded in 1464 by Quauhtlatoa the king of Tlaltelolco, who was
succeeded by Moquiuix. Axayacatl now became lord of Tenochtitlan, and
events moved fast in the valley. Totoquihuatzin, ruler of Tlacopan,
died the next year, and was succeeded by Chimalpopoca,[2] while the
long life of Nezahualcoyotl came to an end in 1472, and Nezahualpilli
assumed the power in Tezcoco. The following year Moquiuix intrigued
with the Chalca and others against Axayacatl, and the latter stormed
Tlaltelolco and killed the traitor. From this time Tlaltelolco was
definitely united to its neighbour, and placed under a governor, the
kingship being abolished. This reign was signalized, as far as external
affairs were concerned, by an expedition to the Zapotec territory,
as far as and beyond Tehuantepec, and though no doubt the province
cannot be said to have been absolutely conquered, yet it had the
effect of opening up the road to the fertile district of Soconusco,
rich in cacao, feathers and gems. Archæologically considered the
Zapotec country constitutes an extremely interesting region, if only
for the reason that they and the smaller tribes immediately in their
neighbourhood possessed no legends hinting at immigration, but claimed
that their ancestors issued from caves, rocks or trees in the locality.
Similar myths were found among the Mixtec also, but immigration
legends are not wanting. For instance, one story relates that the first
lords entered the country from the north, after the Mexican migration,
and settled between Achiutla and Tilantongo. The relationship which
exists between the Mixtec and Zapotec languages suggests a strong
common element, but it seems probable that the former people had
received an element of some immigrant nationality, possibly akin to the
Toltec or Chichimec. This element was not strong enough to influence
the local dialects, but gave the Mixtec that superiority in arms which
enabled them to encroach upon the Zapotec district. East of the Zapotec
were the uncultured Mixe and Zoque, from whom the Zapotec in their turn
had won territory, including Tehuantepec.

To return to the conquests of Axayacatl, this king completed the
reduction of the Toluca valley, and reconquered the region of Cotaxtla
which had revolted, so that his successor Tizoc, who seems also to
have sent an expedition to the Mixtec country, was able to lay claim
to an empire extending over the valleys of Toluca and the Rio de las
Balsas, and the highlands of Mixteca, Huaxteca, Orizaba, Cotaxtla and
Teotitlan. Axayacatl died in 1469, and Tizoc in 1482, and Auitzotl
became the Aztec ruler. He continued the strenuous foreign policy
of his predecessors, and proved a vigorous conqueror, though he was
passionate and often cruel in administration. His armies conquered many
cities in the Zapotec country, including Mitla (1494), Teozapotlan
(1495) and Tehuantepec, and after seizing Tonala, the key to the
country further south and east, pursued their victorious course through
Soconusco, _via_ Mapaxtepec, Escuintla and Huiztla, as far as
Huehuetlan. Other expeditions penetrated Chiapas, and even subdued
certain cities in Guatemala. Probably however there was nothing like an
effective occupation of the country beyond the city of Oaxaca, where a
Mexican colony was established. In particular Chiapas can never be said
to have been conquered. Still, in this reign the Aztec power reached
its furthest extent, and the influence of Tenochtitlan was felt from
the Panuco valley to northern Guatemala, and from Tuxpan to Acapulco.
In the city itself Auitzotl completed the great pyramid-temple to
Uitzilopochtli, the tribal god of the Aztec, which his predecessor had
commenced, and also constructed an aqueduct which supplied water from
Coyoacan. A severe inundation took place in his reign, and as he was
escaping from the lower floor of a building which had become flooded,
he struck his head against the lintel, causing an injury from which
he eventually died. Montecuzoma, the second of that name, succeeded
in the year 1502; Nezahualpilli was still ruling in Tezcoco, but
Chimalpopoca of Tlacopan had died in 1489 and Totoquiuatzin the second
was now the ruler there. Montecuzoma had been trained as a priest as
well as a soldier, and though his military abilities enabled him to
maintain the empire much in the same condition as he received it, he
was particularly superstitious and amenable to sacerdotal influence.
Abroad he quelled a rebellion among the Zapotec and Mixtec, and carried
on operations in Soconusco and Vera Cruz. Nearer home he seized the
opportunity of a quarrel between the Tlaxcalans and Uexotzinca to
espouse the cause of the latter and to carry on a vigorous campaign
against the former. For many years the Aztec had been able seriously
to obstruct Tlaxcalan trade with the coast, so much so in fact that
salt was a rarity in that province, but Montecuzoma made an energetic
attack upon their territory. Undismayed, the Tlaxcalans fortified the
approach to their dominions with a wall six miles long, and succeeded
in withstanding the invasion and even in inflicting defeats upon
their foes. Meanwhile Nezahualpilli, ruler of Tezcoco, died in 1515,
and his son Cacamatzin was elected in his place. A younger son,
Ixtlilxochitl, laid claim to the power and succeeded in attracting a
number of supporters. He was still haunting the neighbouring mountains
and carrying on a guerilla warfare with the confederate troops when the
arrival of the Spaniards in 1519 brought the development of aboriginal
American civilization to an abrupt close. Montecuzoma had emphasized
the aristocratic aspect of Mexican government, and under him the court
ceremonial had been greatly elaborated. He surrounded himself with a
state, and the rich tribute which now poured into Tenochtitlan enabled
him not only to undertake many important works for the beautifying of
the city, but to model his personal service on a scale which surpasses
even the “Arabian Nights.” The magnificent “calendar-stone,” figured
on =Pl. VIII=, 1, p. 74, was brought by him from Coyoacan to
serve probably as a sacrificial altar to the sun in the enclosure of
the great temple of Uitzilopochtli. He was a strong personality, and
though his superstitious training led him to adopt a fatally hesitating
policy when the Spaniards landed, he displayed under all circumstances
a personal courage and dignity which lend additional pathos to his
fate.

Of Zapotec and Mixtec history, apart from that of Mexico, we know
practically nothing. We hear of a mythical Mixtec king named
Dzahuindanda, who possessed a magic sack which he was wont to take
to a desolate mountain and shake, after appropriate incantations,
producing thereby as many soldiers as he required. Less legendary are
the Zapotec Zociyoeza and his son Zociyopi, the former of whom ruled
at Teozapotlan, the latter at Tehuantepec. Zociyoeza in fact opposed
the Mexican advance, and held out against the invading troops for four
years entrenched in Quiengola, until at last he was able to conclude an
honourable peace. Between the Mixtec and Zapotec, hostilities seem to
have been not uncommon, and from a story told by Burgoa it would appear
that the Zapotec did not form a very large state. The principal ruler
was the chief of Teozapotlan, but his resources could not have been
great, since he asked a Mixtec king for troops to defend his city while
he was absent upon a campaign against the Mixe in Tehuantepec. The same
author relates that after being successful in his operations the chief
rashly laid claim to certain Mixtec territory, a demand which resulted
in the seizure by the Mixtec of a large slice of the Oaxaca region, and
the founding of the Mixtec town of Xoxocotlan.

The history of the Pazcuaro plateau seems to have been very similar
to that of the Mexican valley. Originally the shores of the lake were
occupied by a population of agriculturists and fishers, probably akin
to the pre-Toltec inhabitants around the lake of Tezcoco. Upon them
descended, from the hills around Zacapu, certain tribes of wandering
hunters led by a tribal hero Ticatamé. The new-comers mingled and
intermarried with the original population and adopted their habits, but
friction arose, Ticatamé was killed and the idol of the immigrants,
Curicaveri, was captured. Sicuirancha, son of Ticatamé, called upon
the god for aid, the foe were smitten with a pestilence and the idol
recaptured. In course of time the immigrants became a ruling class,
and to the whole population the name Tarascan was given, from Taras,
another hunting-god who was identified with the Chichimec Mixcoatl.
It is possible that this ruling class was originally of Chichimec
stock, and its descent upon Pazcuaro was part of that general movement
southward which took place among the hunting tribes of the north
towards the end of the Toltec rule. If this is so they must have
abandoned their own language in favour of the tongue of the original
agricultural population with whom they intermarried. It is interesting
to find in Michoacan a definite story of a Toltec immigration. A
body of Toltec, specified as skilled workers in gold, stone and
feather-work, are said to have travelled from Vera Cruz _via_
Tehuacan, Coyoacan and Tenochtitlan to Xiuhquillan (Tzitzipu, on L.
Pazcuaro), where they settled. The Tarascan of later date bore a high
reputation as stone-cutters, mosaic-workers and feather-workers, and
this fact, together with the presence in Michoacan of a peculiar class
of pottery with polychrome _champ-levé_ ornament, which is also
characteristic of the pre-Aztec remains of the valley, suggest that
Toltec influence had in fact penetrated into Michoacan.

Totonac history is as deficient as that of the Zapotec. Tradition
related that they were immigrants into the country where they were
found by the Spaniards, and lived there for about six and a half
centuries in complete independence. Less than two centuries after
their immigration, certain “Chichimec” tribes of lower culture settled
on their north-western borders, and in course of time considerable
intercourse, and even intermarriage, sprang up between them. Eventually
civil war broke out among the Totonac, much of the country was laid
waste and sections of the population emigrated from the district. It
is quite possible that the “Toltec” who are said to have found their
way to Michoacan may have been a body of Totonac emigrants who left
their country at this period. The result of the civil strife was that
a great portion of Totonac region fell under “Chichimec” domination.
Three kings of this nationality held sway, until, in the reign of the
last, the Aztec conquered the country and reduced it to the status of a
province as related above.

Much light is shed upon the interrelation of the various tribes who
combined to form the population of Mexico by the study of their various
gods; and since religion formed the mainspring not only of all public
but also of private life, it will be as well to deal as shortly as
possible with this complicated subject before proceeding to discuss
the manners and customs of the pre-Spanish inhabitants and their
archæological remains which have been found scattered throughout the
country.

  [Illustration:

    _Photo Prof. Seler_      _Mexico Museum_

  MEXICO

  COLOSSAL STONE FIGURE OF COATLICUE]




                     CHAPTER II--MEXICO: THE GODS


The question of the religion of the Ancient Mexicans is by no means
easy to approach. At the time of the Spanish conquest the Mexican
pantheon was still in a state of great confusion, and the number of
tribal cults of which it was composed had not yet been reduced to a
homogeneous whole. Gods whose functions were similar or associated had
been invested with the attributes one of the other, and there is reason
to suspect that the names of deities whose importance was relatively
recent had been incorporated in the earlier myths by a priesthood
jealous of the dignity of its own particular god. The history of the
valley of Mexico, as far as it can be traced, consists, as we have
seen, of the conquest from time to time of the sedentary agricultural
population by ruder and more warlike tribes from the hills. The
victors, conscious of their cultural inferiority, in adopting to the
best of their ability the mode of life of the conquered, were careful
also to propitiate the local gods, whom they regarded as responsible
for the superior culture of the latter; though they attempted, as far
as they dared, to subordinate them to their own chief deity. These
hill-tribes of primitive hunters seem to have worshipped each a god
of its own, who was regarded as its personal leader, who presided
over war and the chase and who appears to have been connected with
the stars and occasionally with the sun. This connection with the
sun was, I am inclined to think, an afterthought, and not universal,
arising from the belief that war was instituted in order to provide
the sun with blood-offerings. To this class of deities belong
Curicaveri, Tiripemé and Taras, worshipped by the Tarascans, Mixcoatl
of the Otomi, Chichimec and Matlatzinca, Camaxtli of Tlaxcala and
Uexotzinco, Amimitl and Atlaua of the Chiampanec, and the Mexican
Uitzilopochtli (Fig. 3, _f_). The connection is especially close
between Mixcoatl, Camaxtli and Uitzilopochtli, in fact they are
occasionally identified. Their attributes consist of a spear-thrower
and net bag, or bow and arrows, and the arrows are sometimes shown
as tipped with down, in allusion to the fact that they are gods of
sacrifice, such being the _insignia_ of prisoners destined for the
sacrificial stone; Uitzilopochtli is usually shown in the dress of a
humming-bird (Uitzitzilin) in punning allusion to his name, and with
him is associated a minor deity, Paynal, believed to be his messenger.
According to a widespread legend Uitzilopochtli is said to have been
conceived by his mother, Coatlicue, from a ball of down which fell from
heaven and which she placed in her bosom; her other sons, the Centzon
Uitznaua (Four hundred Southerners, the number meaning “innumerable”),
at the instigation of their sister Coyolxauhqui (Pl. II, 1), accused
Coatlicue of improper conduct, and attempted to kill her; but
Uitzilopochtli, springing from his mother’s body, defeated them,
decapitating Coyolxauhqui with the _xiuhcoatl_ or “fire-snake”
with which he was armed. Coatlicue was an earth-goddess, patron of
flower-sellers, and, as her name implies, is distinguished by a skirt
woven of snakes (Pl. III); the brothers are identified with the stars
of the southern heaven. Very similar is the legend of Mixcoatl (Fig. 4,
_a_), according to which this god was attacked and killed by the
Centzon Mimizcoa (also stellar deities), but was avenged by his son Ce
Acatl, who slew the latter with the _tezcacoatl_ (“mirror-snake”).
In the person of Mixcoatl we find a direct connection with the Tarascan
Curicaveri, whose symbol was a stone knife kept in a box by the
priest, since the same legend relates that Mixcoatl always carried with
him a stone knife as a fetish. It may also be mentioned in passing
that the date of Uitzilopochtli’s (and Camaxtli’s) movable feast was
1. tecpatl (tecpatl being the stone-knife day-sign), and, as will be
explained later, gods were often known by calendrical names. Mixcoatl’s
knife was said to be a symbol of the peculiar female deity Itzpapalotl
(“obsidian butterfly”), a star-goddess associated with fire and
lightning, and occasionally identified with a mythological two-headed
deer called Itzcueye which figures in the legends of Mixcoatl and
Camaxtli as the captive and wife of the god. This two-headed deer was
again identified at Cuitlauac and Xochimilco with the Colhuacan earth
and warrior goddess Ciuacoatl (Tonantzin or Quilaztli), invoked in
childbirth, whose symbol was an obsidian knife; but, and here is a
good instance of the confused nature of the myths with which we have
to deal, Ciuacoatl was regarded as the mother of Mixcoatl (as also the
other earth-goddess Coatlicue the mother of Uitzilopochtli), and as
sister of the Mimizcoa. The planet Venus was a war-god in Michoacan,
and, under the name Urendequa Vecara, was the especial deity of
Curinguaro, a town hostile to the votaries of Curicaveri. In Mexico
this planet was known as Tlauizcalpantecutli, and was connected in
some respects with prisoners destined for sacrifice. Representations
of Uitzilopochtli are very rare in Mexican art of pre-Spanish date,
but we are told that his face-paint consisted of blue and yellow
horizontal stripes. Mixcoatl and Camaxtli are usually shown with black
paint around the eye, rather in the form of a highway-man’s mask, and
Uitzilopochtli also appears with this occasionally. The distinguishing
feature of Tlauizcalpantecutli is a series of five dots, arranged
quincunx fashion on a dark ground, with the central spot on the nose
(Fig. 4, _c_).

  [Illustration: FIG. 3.--Mexican deities from various MSS.

    A. Tlazolteotl.
    B. Tlaloc.
    C. Xiuhtecutli.
    D. Ciuapipiltin.
    E. Tezcatlipoca.
    F. Uitzilopochtli.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 4.--Mexican deities from various MSS.

    A. Mixcoatl.
    B. Mictlantecutli.
    C. Tlauizcalpantecutli.
    D. Quetzalcoatl as Eecatl.
    E. Tonatiuh.
    F. Ome Tochtli.]

For the sedentary tribes of the valleys, dependent chiefly upon
agriculture and fishing for a livelihood, the deities presiding over
vegetation, rain and earth were the most important; and after the Aztec
had become settled and devoted themselves to intensive cultivation,
they readily adopted these gods and gave them a high place in their
pantheon. Most important of all was Tlaloc, the god of rain and
thunder (Fig. 3, _b_); his worship appears to have been extremely
widespread, and his images are found in numbers among the remains of
pre-Aztec date at Teotihuacan (where he is the only god who can be
identified with certainty), in the Huaxtec country, at Teotitlan, at
Quiengola in the Zapotec district, and at Quen Santo in Guatemala. It
is even related that when the Acolhua first arrived in the valley in
the reign of the first Chichimec ruler Xolotl, they discovered on a
mountain a figure of this god, which remained an honoured object of
worship until it was broken up by order of the first bishop of Mexico.
Tlaloc is one of the most easily recognizable of Mexican deities, since
he is represented with snakes twined about his eyes (the snake being
throughout practically the whole of America the symbol of lightning and
rain), with long teeth, and often with a trunk-like nose. According to
legend he was one of the first gods created, and lived in a kind of
paradise, situated in the east, called Tlalocan, where he presided over
the souls of the drowned and those who in life suffered from dropsical
affections. He was supposed to be assisted in his duties by a number of
subsidiary rain-gods, called Tlaloque, who distributed the rain from
magical pitchers and caused the thunder by striking them with rods.
In the courtyard of Tlaloc’s palace four great jars were supposed to
stand, which contained rain of varying quality. In the first was the
good rain which produced fertile crops; in the second, rain which gave
being to cobwebs and mildew; in the third were stored ice and sleet;
and in the fourth, rain after which nothing matured or dried. Thus

Tlaloc combined two aspects, a beneficent and a terrible; and this is
not unnatural, for rain in Mexico is more often than not accompanied by
thunder, and the fertilizer is therefore also the smiter. As the god of
fertility maize belonged to him, though not altogether by right, for
according to one legend he stole it after it had been discovered by
other gods concealed in the heart of a mountain. The great importance
of Tlaloc and the Tlaloque in the worship of the Ancient Mexicans
may be gathered from the fact that no less than five of the twenty
month-festivals were dedicated to them, and that Tlaloc shared with
Uitzilopochtli the great pyramid at Tenochtitlan. The most important
of the Tlaloque was Opochtli, a fishing and hunting god, the inventor
of nets and the bird-spear. Closely connected with Tlaloc was his wife
Chalchiuhtlicue (Pl. II, 2), goddess of running water, said also to
be sister of the Tlaloque and mother of the Mimizcoa. This goddess,
under the name Matlalcue, was especially worshipped at Tlaxcala, and
is easily recognized by her tasselled headband and cape, and often by
a stepped nose-ornament. The most important festivals to these deities
took place on mountain-tops, for it is there that the rain-clouds
gather before they sweep over the plain, and closely associated with
them was the worship of mountains represented by small figures called
Tepictoton, with hair dressed in two horns, whose sacrificial victims
were similarly adorned. The valley-dwellers of Michoacan around
Pazcuaro revered a goddess of fertility and rain, named Cueravahperi,
casting the hearts of her victims into certain hot springs which were
supposed to give birth to the rain-clouds. In connection with her
worship we are first brought into contact with a strange and gruesome
rite, peculiar to this part of America, and performed exclusively
in honour of agricultural deities. The victim was flayed, and the
priest performed a ceremonial dance wrapped in the fresh skin. The
practice seems to be symbolical of vegetation in the early spring,
apparently dead, but containing within the germ of life and fertility,
and no doubt was originally intended to assist by imitative magic the
process of nature in renewing the food-supply. Corresponding to this
goddess, and, like her, regarded as the mother of the gods, was the
Mexican Teteoinnan or Tozi, a deity held in especial reverence by the
Tlaxcalans and Olmec, and perhaps borrowed from the latter people.
She was in particular the goddess of ripe maize and healing herbs,
patroness of doctors, midwives and bath attendants (for the steam-bath
played an important part in childbirth) and diviners. She too was
connected with the flaying-sacrifice, and was sometimes pictured as
clad in the victim’s skin; otherwise her attributes are the same as
those of Tlazolteotl (see below) and she carries a broom. The maize-god
_par excellence_ was Cinteotl, her son (though occasionally
mentioned as a female deity), who appears originally to have been a
Totonac god. He is usually shown with a vertical line leading down his
cheek, probably representing tears and symbolizing the fertilizing
rain. On certain occasions his priest wore a mask made from the skin of
the thigh of the victim sacrificed in honour of Teteoinnan. At first
sight it is a little surprising to find this god appearing as one of
the tutelary deities of the lapidaries of Xochimilco, but no doubt the
reason of this is that the ripe maize-cob, nature’s mosaic, recalled
the incrusted work which formed one of their principal manufactures.
Closely associated with all these deities was a maize-goddess,
Chicome Coatl, sister of Tlaloc, who presided over agriculture and
was honoured with a flaying-sacrifice; while the young maize-ear had
an especial protector in the goddess Xilonen, perhaps the same as the
Chichimec Xilo worshipped by the inhabitants of the Amantlan district
of Mexico. Another goddess who seems to be connected with maize
was Ilamatecutli, also called Cozcamiauh (maize-necklace), though
she appears to have been a star-goddess as well. She, Teteoinnan and
Xilonen were associated in a peculiar form of sacrifice in which the
victim was decapitated, and which perhaps represented the reaping of
the maize-ear. The sacrifice by decapitation seems to be particularly
connected with the earth-goddesses, who are sometimes shown in the
MSS. with head almost severed from the body, and with two snakes,
perhaps representing streams of blood, issuing from the trunk. Of such
a representation the colossal figure in the Mexican Museum (see Pl.
III) is an example. This deity is either Chicome Coatl or Coatlicue,
probably the latter, to judge from the skirt of serpents which she
wears. In this case the two snakes which spring from her decapitated
body are placed snout to snout, and from the two profiles is compounded
a grotesque face, or rather two such faces, one in front and one
behind. It is worthy of note that the mask of the goddess Ilamatecutli,
apparently another fertility goddess, is said to have been double-faced.

  [Illustration:

    _British Museum_

  MEXICO

  1, 2. STONE MASK REPRESENTING XIPE; THE REVERSE SHOWS THE
  ENTIRE FIGURE OF THE GOD [SYMBOL] TEZCOCO

  (Scale: ⅓rd)]

The god who above all others was connected with the flaying-sacrifice
is Xipe, who is invariably depicted as clad in the victim’s skin (Pl.
IV). He was believed to have been borrowed from the Oaxaca tribes,
was worshipped in Jalisco, and finds a parallel in the sea-god of
the Tarascans. Both Xipe and the latter are characterized by red and
white paint (though Xipe’s skin dress is yellow), and the victims of
both were forced to fight for their lives in a gladiatorial combat. At
the great feast of Xipe those warriors who had taken captives in war
offered them to the god, and wore their skins during the ensuing month.
He was a god of sowing, but being connected with the warrior’s death
by sacrifice was also a war-god, and his livery, including a drum as
back-device, was worn in battle by the Mexican kings. In invocations
his ceremonial name was “Night-drinker,” and he was prayed to give
moisture to the crops. “Put on your golden garment; why does it not
rain? It might be that I perished, I, the young maize-plant.” In this
connection another form of sacrifice was practised in his honour; a
captive was tied to a scaffold and shot with darts so that his blood
streamed down upon the ground (Fig. 5, _a_). This proceeding may
be regarded in the light of imitative magic, to secure fertilizing rain
for the earth. It was first performed, so the legend says, in honour of
the earth-deities, and occurred also in South America among the tribes
of Colombia. In the illustration, the victim is shown wearing the
peculiar form of head-dress associated with Xipe. A particular emblem
carried by the water and fertility deities is the _chicauaztli_,
or rattle-staff (see Pl. IV, 1), often seen in the hands of Xipe,
Chicome Coatl and Cinteotl, and associated in invocations with Tlaloc.
This instrument, like the rattle-staves of West Africa, may almost
certainly be regarded as a charm to bring rain by imitating its sound.
Besides the functions already mentioned, Xipe also exercised that of
protector of goldsmiths, since the yellow skin in which he was clad was
supposed to typify an overlay of gold foil.

  [Illustration: FIG. 5.--Mexican methods of Sacrifice.

    A. Arrow sacrifice.
    B. Gladiatorial sacrifice.
    C. Ordinary sacrifice.

  (_Zouche MS., British Museum_)]

Among the fertility gods must be mentioned the goddess of flowers,
love and pregnancy, Xochiquetzal (Pl. IX, 6; p. 82), especially
worshipped by the Tlalhuica (also at Tlaxcala), and mentioned as
the wife of Cinteotl, though one legend makes her the first wife of
Tlaloc, stolen by Tezcatlipoca, the Mexican Jupiter. Her distinguishing
_insignia_ are two large feather plumes upon her head, and she
seems to be akin to the Tarascan goddess of Tzintzuntzan, Xaratanga,
who was associated with Curicaveri as his wife. The functions of this
deity however were rather more extended, since she was also regarded
as an earth- and maize-goddess, and was connected with the game
_tlaxtli_. Xochiquetzal was the especial patroness of weaving
and embroidery, of which arts she was the supposed inventor. The male
equivalent to this goddess was Xochipilli, god of flowers, dance,
song and games (Pl. V, 1). He is figured with the high crest of the
coxcoxtli bird on his head, a white butterfly painted on his mouth,
and occasionally with the tear face-paint. He appears to have been
introduced from the Xelhua district on the Oaxaca border, and in one
of his manifestations was known by the calendrical name of Macuil
Xochitl (Five Flower), in which case he bears a hand painted across
his mouth (a constant feature of gods into whose name the number five
enters). He was further regarded as identical with, or as the son
of, Pilzintecutli, a sun-god, who again was thought to be the son of
Mictlantecutli, the lord of the underworld. During recent excavations
in Mexico city, a stone figure of Xochipilli was found with a large
number of miniature musical instruments in stone and pottery.

  [Illustration: MEXICO

    _British Museum_

  1. STONE FIGURE OF XOCHIPILLI (THE CHARACTERISTIC HIGH
  CREST OF THE HEAD-DRESS IS MISSING) 2. STONE WITH FIGURE OF A
  XIUHCOATL (FIRE-SNAKE IN RELIEF)

  (Scale: 1, ⅛th; 2, ⅑th)]

Among the gods of fertility must be reckoned those who presided over
_octli_ (Fig. 4, _f_), the intoxicating drink obtained from the maguey
(the American aloe, _Agave americana_). These deities were connected
with the harvest, and also bore a relation to the moon; they were
regarded as innumerable, a fact explained by an early chronicler
as typifying the countless forms of drunkenness, and were spoken
of collectively as Centzon Totochtin or the “Four hundred (i.e.
innumerable) Rabbits.” Many names of these gods have come down to us;
they were all regarded as brothers, and it is possible that each one
represents a section of the Mexican population, especially as their
names seem taken from the names of places. If so their number would
point to an early date for the discovery of octli. Tezcatzoncatl
is said by some to be the chief, by others Izquitecatl, or again
Ome Tochtli, (Two Rabbit, a calendrical name taken from the date
of the principal feast). The two former are Chichimec gods, and
Coatlicue was assigned to both as wife. Tepoztecatl was the octli god
of the Chichimec inhabitants of the Amantlan quarter, while Patecatl
was connected with the Huaxtec, a people popularly supposed to be
especially given to drunkenness. Indeed one legend makes the tribal
father of this people the first drunkard. In invocations the Totochtin
were related to Colhuacan. Their principal _insignia_ consisted of red
and black face-paint, and a semi-lunar nose-ornament which appears also
on their shields, while Tepoztecatl, the god to whom most probably
the temple at Tepoztlan was erected, carries an axe. As sister of the
Totochtin we have Mayauel, the agave goddess, wife of Patecatl, who,
like the Ephesian Diana, was supposed to have four hundred breasts.
An interesting myth attaches to Tezcatzoncatl, who was fabled to have
been killed and revived by Tezcatlipoca, by which action the sleep
of the drunken, so similar to death, became harmless for men. No
doubt it was this awakening after heavy sleep, as much as anything
else, which connected the octli gods with the waxing and waning of
vegetation and the moon. The Tarascans of Cumachan also worshipped an
octli god, who was believed to be lame, since he disgraced himself by
becoming intoxicated in heaven, and was thrown thence to the earth.
The supremacy which Tlaloc was supposed to exercise over the deities
of fertility is well seen in the fact that at the great feast to the
mountains four women and a man were sacrificed to him, named after five
of these divinities, Matlalcue, Mayauel, Tepexoch, Xochitecatl (the two
latter connected with flowers), and the male god of snakes, Milnauatl.
One other goddess connected with the food-supply deserves mention here,
namely Uixtociuatl, the deity of salt, who bore a certain relation to
Chalchiuhtlicue.

The earth-goddesses Teteoinnan and (to a less degree) Chicome Coatl
have already been mentioned, but another most important female
divinity, an earth-goddess, but not associated with vegetation, was
Tlazolteotl (Fig. 3, _a_). This deity seems originally to have
come from the Olmec, and was identified with the Huaxtec Ixcuina. She
is at times identified also with Teteoinnan, and was occasionally
honoured with a flaying-sacrifice, but her chief province was the
superintendence of carnal sin, confession and penitence. She is shown
with a black mouth and chin, a semi-lunar nose-ornament, and a cotton
headband in which are stuck two spindles. The cult of this goddess was
practised by the Huaxtec, Olmec and Mixtec, but not by the Chichimec or
Tarascans.

We must now consider one of the most interesting and important gods of
the Mexican pantheon, Tezcatlipoca (Fig. 3, _e_). It is difficult
to give a short, and at the same time clear, account of his manifold
functions and manifestations, since there were few departments of
native life with which he was not intimately connected. In the first
place he was the all-powerful god of the Nahua-speaking tribes,
worshipped by them in common; as such he was superior to the tribal
war- and hunting-gods such as Mixcoatl and Uitzilopochtli, and in
actual practice he seems to have been regarded with even greater awe.
In typical form he appears with face banded with yellow and black, a
shell ring breast-ornament, and a mirror from which a spire of smoke
issues. This smoking mirror is his especial sign, and constitutes the
rebus of his name; in it he was supposed to see all that was occurring
on earth, for one of his main functions was the distribution of rewards
and punishments. He bears this mirror on his head, or very often in
place of one of his feet, a peculiarity explained by the idea that
in his capacity of god of the setting sun he lost his foot owing to
the premature closing of the doors of the underworld. Sometimes the
missing foot is replaced by a stone knife, and in this manifestation
he was known as Itztli, the knife-god. He is thus brought into intimate
relation with the hunting deities, of whom this weapon was a symbol.
Besides this, attempts seem to have been made by the various tribes
to dignify their respective gods by actual identification with the
supreme deity. One legend states that he became Mixcoatl, and in this
personality invented the production of fire from flint. Or again, he
appears under two forms, a red and a black Tezcatlipoca, and the latter
is identified with Camaxtli and Uitzilopochtli. This distinction of
colour recalls the yellow and black Tiripemés of the Tarascans, of
whom the former was identified with Curicaveri. One of the many names
of Tezcatlipoca was Yoalli Eecatl, the night-wind, and he was supposed
to wander through the streets after dark in search of evildoers. Seats
were placed for him at cross-roads, and a cross-road is often shown as
one of his attributes in the manuscripts. When portrayed with bandaged
eyes he bore the name of Itztlacoliuhqui, and presided over sin and
cold.

As the god of divine punishment he was also a god of confession, and
as such was associated with Tlazolteotl, while his connection with war
is seen in the fact that he was regarded as the especial patron of the
warrior-school, or Telpochcalli. In his dual capacity as a night- and
warrior-god he was supposed to appear in all sorts of grisly shapes
in order to test the courage of those he might meet. To flee from
one of these phantoms was fatal, but the brave man who seized the
apparition and wrestled with it until it gave him one or more spines
of the maguey, was rewarded with a similar number of prisoners in his
next battle. One of the forms which the god assumed on such occasions
was a headless body with two doors in its chest which opened and shut,
making a noise like the sound of an axe upon a tree. At the same time
this deity possessed a lighter side; as Omacatl (a calendrical name,
“Two Reed”) he was the god of banquets and festive entertainments, and
as Tlamatzincatl he was regarded as endowed with perpetual youth. His
relation to the produce-goddesses is seen in the fact that the four
women given as wives to the victim, identified with the god himself,
who was destined to be sacrificed at his principal feast, bore the
ceremonial names of Xilonen, Xochiquetzal, Uixtociuatl and Atlatonan,
the last-named being a goddess associated with Teteoinnan and honoured
with a flaying-sacrifice.

Another important deity, whose relations are peculiarly difficult to
unravel, was Quetzalcoatl (=Pl. VI=, 2). He was the especial
god of the Toltec, inventor and patron of the arts and crafts,
and originator of the calendar and priestly ritual. In studying
the extremely confused legends concerned with this divinity it is
important to remember two facts which have probably given rise to
much misunderstanding. First that the high-priest of the god bore his
name, secondly that the last Toltec king, in whose reign occurred the
fall of Tulan and the scattering of the Toltec, was called Topiltzin
Quetzalcoatl. The relation of this god to the Maya deity Kukulkan,
whose name is an exact equivalent (quetzal = kukul, the quetzal bird;
coatl = kan, snake), is discussed below (p. 226). It is said that after
giving laws to the people he departed eastward, and on reaching the
sea put off his feather dress and turquoise snake-mask and immolated
himself upon a funeral pyre, his soul becoming the morning star; or,
according to another account, he sailed away eastward, promising to
return in a year of similar date. As a god of the morning star he
bore the calendrical name of Ce Acatl (“One Reed”), one of the dates
marking the periodical appearances of Venus. It will be remembered
that we have seen a deity named Ce Acatl as a warrior-god, slaying
the Mimizcoa who had killed his father Mixcoatl. But this deity is
certainly not to be identified with Ce Acatl Quetzalcoatl, who
was essentially a god of peace, averse to human sacrifice. Among
the hunting peoples, as can be seen especially from a study of the
Tarascan tribes, the morning star was a war-god, while the association
of Quetzalcoatl with this planet was due to the fact that it was the
regulator of the solar calendar as explained subsequently. In the
second legend the promise of the god to return in a year ce acatl had
very far-reaching effects. Quetzalcoatl was regarded as white and
bearded, and the arrival of the Spaniards in a year bearing this date
seemed to the Mexicans to possess a religious sanction which proved of
inestimable service to the invaders. Indeed, but for this legend it
is more than doubtful whether the almost incredible exploit of Cortés
would have been successful. Quetzalcoatl is usually shown with black
paint, the priestly colour, and wearing a pointed head-dress of the
form associated with the Huaxtec, and hook-shaped ear pendants. As
Eecatl the wind-god he bears a mask with a long snout, and a spirally
marked shell breast-ornament, typifying the eddies of the wind (Fig.
4, _d_). In this capacity he was associated with the rain-gods,
for whom he was said to sweep the road, and in one place he is given
the same title as Tezcatlipoca, Yoalli Eecatl, the night-wind. As a
god of ceremonial purification he is generally shown with the bone
implement for piercing the ears, sometimes stuck in his head-dress,
and, as a patron of education, children were presented to him at the
public school or Calmecac. His legendary connection with Tezcatlipoca
is interesting. In one myth the two are mentioned as creating-gods, who
raised the heavens after they had fallen upon the earth at the end of
the last mythical period. In another they are shown as foes, and it is
Tezcatlipoca who by his machinations drives Quetzalcoatl from Tulan.
The latter story probably represents the retirement of the Toltec
before the advancing waves of Nahua migration. As might be expected,
Quetzalcoatl is closely associated with the peoples of the eastern
coast, he wears Huaxtec dress, and the Olmec are mentioned as his
children; further, he was worshipped at Tlaxcala and Uexotzinco, and
especially at Cholula, cities in which the Toltec at their dispersal
had settled in numbers. Cholula was in fact the centre of his worship
in later times, and his great pyramid there, greater even than that of
Uitzilopochtli in Mexico, was regarded with particular veneration by
the surrounding peoples, even by the Aztec conquerors. One legend makes
Quetzalcoatl the chief agent in the final creation of man. According to
this story he goes to the underworld to fetch bones; as he returns he
falls, the bones drop to earth and quails gnaw them. Finally Ciuacoatl
pounds them up and makes a paste from which men are formed. The same
myth shows him as the discoverer of maize, which was concealed in the
mountain Tonacatepetl. All the gods were searching for it, but the way
was known to the ants alone. Quetzalcoatl turns himself into a black
ant, and a red ant guides him thither, but the mountain is too heavy
to lift, so the god Xolotl (in his manifestation as Nanauatzin) splits
it open. This god Xolotl, who will be mentioned later, is closely
associated in dress and attributes with Quetzalcoatl, as also are the
octli-gods, and he is sometimes given as the hero of the creation-myth
quoted above. But the maize was not destined to remain the possession
of Quetzalcoatl, for it was stolen by Tlaloc, to whom since that time
it belongs. In many of the invocations given by Sahagun, Quetzalcoatl
is mentioned as a creator-god. A peculiar point in connection with
this deity is seen in the practice of professional thieves, who were
accustomed to make an image of Quetzalcoatl which they carried with
them when they set out to rob a house. The explanation may be sought
in the fact that the wind-god was naturally typical of mutability,
and so was patron of sorcery and might be supposed to aid the magical
precautions taken by robbers to cast sleep upon the inmates of the
house which they wished to attack, as related below. A peculiar legend
accounts for the feather-work garments and mask worn by Quetzalcoatl;
from two sources we learn that this god was extremely ugly, and one
of them adds that when Tezcatlipoca showed him his reflection in his
mirror, Quetzalcoatl was so ashamed that he adopted these aids to
concealment. The other states that his image was always kept covered.

Besides Tezcatlipoca, there were also other high gods, whose functions
related to creation and generation, but, like many high gods among
primitive peoples, the amount of active worship paid them was
relatively small. Such were Tonacatecutli and his wife Tonacaciuatl,
dwellers in the highest heaven, who were said to be Toltec deities,
and were identified with Ometecutli and Omeciuatl, also associated
with Tulan. The creation once over, they received little direct
worship, save that appeals were made to them in invocations relative
to pregnancy and birth. Tonacatecutli was also identified with Chicome
Xochitl (“Seven Flower,” a calendrical name), in which manifestation
he appeared as a fertility-god, and Tonacaciuatl was at times likewise
identified with Xochiquetzal and Chicome Coatl. Attention has already
been called to the manner in which the Aztec tried to add to the
dignity of their tribal god by transferring to him the functions of
other deities, and it is not therefore surprising to find in one
passage that Uitzilopochtli is identified with Tonacatecutli. Connected
with the creator-deities are two interesting personalities, Oxomoco
(male) and Cipactonal (female). These were the prototypes of all
magicians, patrons of the magical arts, assistants in the creation
of men and in the discovery of maize, and general advisers in the
migration of the Nahua tribes. The material attributes of these
personages are not clear, and it is difficult to find a pictorial
representation which can be said with certainty to portray either of
them. As regards Mictlantecutli, the god of the underworld, the case is
quite otherwise; he is very frequently shown, and nearly always takes
the form of a skeleton, often with a stone knife in place of his nose
(Fig. 4, _b_). Skulls and bones are his inevitable accompaniments,
the owl is his bird, and his feminine partner was named Mictlanciuatl.
Other elemental divinities, of rather nebulous attributes, were the
sky-gods Citlalicue and Citlaltonac, who were associated with the
creator-gods, the sun and the morning star; and also Yoaltecutli and
Yoalticitl, night-deities, of whom the former seems to be identified
with the sun and the constellation Gemini, and the latter with
Teteoinnan.

  [Illustration:

    _Photo. Prof. Seler_      _Vienna Museum_

  1]

  [Illustration:

    _British Museum_

  2

  MEXICO

  1. SCULPTURED STONE VASE

  2. STONE FIGURE OF QUETZALCOATL

  (Scale: ¼th)]

We now come to a deity of great importance, the sun, called by the name
of Tonatiuh, and the calendrical name of Naui Olin (“Four Movement,”
Fig. 4, _e_). This god is easily recognizable by the sun-disc, set
about with divergent rays, which he carries, and by his nose-ornament
and long quetzal-feathers. Mexican legend recognizes no less than
four previous suns, each marking a world period, and each terminating
in a convulsion of nature which resulted in a universal destruction.
Accounts differ as regards the order of these suns, but the authentic
version is probably that which is supported by the so-called
“calendar-stone” figured on Pl. VIII, 1, and Fig. 8. According to this
version, when all was dark, Tezcatlipoca transformed himself into the
sun to give light to men. This sun, known by the calendrical name of
Naui Ocelotl (Four Ocelot), terminated in the destruction of mankind,
including a race of giants, by jaguars. Quetzalcoatl became the
second sun, called Naui Eecatl (“Four Wind”), and the age terminated
in a terrible hurricane, during which mankind was transformed into
monkeys. The third sun, Naui Quiauitl (“Four Rain”), was Tlaloc,
and the destruction came by means of a rain of fire. The fourth was
Chalchiuhtlicue, Naui Atl (“Four Water”), and mankind was finally
destroyed by a deluge, during which they became fishes. The present
sun, Naui Olin (“Four Movement”) is destined to conclude with an
earthquake.

  [Illustration: FIG. 6.--The moon.

  (_Borgia MS., Rome_)]

A fuller account of the birth of the historical sun runs as follows.
All the gods were assembled at Teotihuacan, waiting for the appearance
of the planet and performing penance. A great fire was prepared,
into which, after some hesitation, the syphilitic god Nanauatzin (a
manifestation of the dog-headed sun- and lightning-deity, the patron
of twins, Xolotl) leaped, reappearing later as the sun. Fired by his
example, Tecociztecatl leaped after him, but he failed to spring
into the glowing heart of the fire and he reappeared as the moon,
the surface of which is clouded with the black ashes of the pyre. A
variant myth makes Quetzalcoatl cast his son into the fire to become
the sun, while Tlaloc throws his son in later and he becomes the moon.
The sun once created, some nourishment had to be found for him, and
various gods sacrificed themselves so that he might obtain sustenance
from their blood and hearts. A variant legend narrates the special
creation of the Centzon Mimizcoa who by fighting might provide the sun
with the necessary blood-offerings. The connection of the sun with the
war-gods is therefore very close, for war in Mexico was in the main of
a ceremonial nature, undertaken with the express purpose of obtaining
prisoners for sacrifice, and not necessarily with the intention of
inflicting mortal hurt upon the foe. It is in this sense that in a
ceremonial invocation to Uitzilopochtli, the warrior-god, the deity is
made to exclaim “Through me has the sun risen.” From this point of view
the sun is closely connected with the souls of warriors perishing in
war or on the sacrificial stone, who escorted the orb from the eastern
horizon to the zenith; and also with the souls of women dying in
childbirth, the female counterparts of the warriors, who accompanied it
from the zenith to its setting. These female souls were deified under
the name of Ciuapipiltin or Ciuateteo, and were supposed to descend
to the earth on certain dates and inflict maladies on children (Fig.
3, _d_). They are included under the general term of Tzitzimimé,
lightning-demons, of whom Itzpapalotl was one, and whose advent to
destroy the world was greatly feared during eclipses and at the end
of each fifty-two-year period. Associated with the sun as escort
was Xolotl, the dog-headed god of twins and monstrosities, and, in
invocations, the earth-god Tlaltecutli, who, like him, was supposed to
be nourished with the blood of warriors killed in fight and sacrifice.
The creation of the moon, Meztli, in the person of Tecociztecatl has
already been mentioned, but other deities were connected with it,
especially those associated with vegetation. The waxing and waning of
the moon was supposed to typify the process of nature, and the moon
was supposed to exercise an influence over vegetable growth; it is
even possible that the phases of this satellite may have possessed
a calendrical significance before the invention of the solar year.
Consequently we find the earth-goddess Tlazolteotl associated with
Meztli, and also the harvest-gods, the Totochtin. Probably the
connection with the Totochtin was emphasized by the fact that the
Mexicans, instead of the “man in the moon,” saw the figure of a rabbit
(tochtli) in the disc (Fig. 6). Both Tlazolteotl and the Totochtin
wear semi-lunar nose-ornaments, exactly similar to the outline of the
moon as shown in manuscripts, which often portray it as a curved bone
filled with water. A more or less constant emblem of the moon-god is
a spiral sea-shell, which he bears partly in his capacity as a god of
birth.

Another elemental god of great importance in domestic as well as
public worship was the fire-god, known to the Aztec under the name of
Xiuhtecutli (Fig. 3, _c_). His worship probably dated from a very
early period, and he also bore the name of Ueueteotl, “the old-old
god.” Among the Tarascans, this deity was the centre of the domestic
cult, and the Tepanec and Otomi worshipped him under the name of
Otontecutli. Under this name he was invoked in historic times by the
inhabitants of the Tepanec cities of Azcapotzalco and Tlacopan and of
Colhuacan. At Xochimilco the fire-deity appears as a goddess, under
the name of Chantico or Quaxolotl. Xiuhtecutli is generally shown
with a horizontally-banded face (in this respect the illustration
in Fig. 3, _c_, is not typical), and his prevailing colour is
yellow. On his back he bears the fire-snake, xiuhcoatl (see Pl. V,
2), and a butterfly, papalotl, frequently appears in his hair. It
may be mentioned that in general horizontal face-paint seems to be
characteristic of the gods of the immigrant hunter tribes, the vertical
of the agricultural gods of the sedentary tribes of the valley. The
butterfly is closely connected with fire, since the fluttering flight
of this insect was supposed to resemble the flicker of a flame. Mexican
mythology is full of poetical imagery of this sort, which constitutes a
welcome relief to the gruesomeness of many of their rites. The fire-god
was connected with perhaps the most horrible of their sacrifices; at
his most important feast the victims were cast living into a huge
brazier, and dragged thence with hooks before death brought a welcome
relief, to have their hearts torn from their bodies in the customary
manner. An unexpected feature of this god is exemplified in the belief
that he was supposed to dwell in the water. As mentioned above,
Tezcatlipoca is connected with fire, in so far as he is supposed first
to have produced it from flint, after assuming the form of Mixcoatl.

Besides the gods mentioned above there were a number with special
functions, a few of whom may now be mentioned. Gods connected with,
or invoked during, pregnancy and at birth, besides Chalchiuhtlicue,
Ciuacoatl, Teteoinnan, Xochiquetzal and the creating deities, were
Chalchiuhtlatonac, associated with Chalchiuhtlicue, and Ayopechtli,
the goddess of birth proper, who, like Mayauel, is usually represented
as seated on a tortoise. To Ixtlilton, the black god, brother of
Macuil xochitl, a sacrifice was made when the child first spoke,
and he was regarded as the medical god for children. Other gods,
already mentioned, with medical functions were Amimitl (dysentery),
Macuilxochitl, Xochiquetzal and Nanauatzin (genital affections), Tlaloc
(dropsy), Xipe (skin-diseases), Cinteotl (leprosy), Tezcatlipoca
and Tlauizcalpantecutli (senders of sickness), Teteoinnan (goddess
of healing herbs), and Tzapotlatenan (who discovered the healing
properties of turpentine). The various guilds in Mexico, constituted
by members of particular trades, held special rites in honour of those
gods who were supposed to preside over their daily activities. Space
forbids the inclusion of a complete list, since most can be identified
from the details given above. One god however deserves especial
mention, Yacatecutli, the god of the Pochteca or travelling merchants,
who formed a guild of enormous political importance as will be shown
later. Every night while on a journey the merchants, who travelled
in companies, burnt incense before their staves which, fastened in a
bundle, represented his image, and elaborate rites were held in his
honour before their departure and on their return. He was associated
in worship with Coyotlinauatl, the god of the guild of feather-workers
who inhabited the quarter of Amantlan, which was conterminous with the
quarter of the Pochteca. Finally a peculiar god, whose function, other
than calendrical, is indeterminate, may be mentioned; the bear-headed
Tepeyollotl, the “heart of the mountain,” a cave-god. He is often
shown with Tezcatlipoca’s mirror, and may be a manifestation of that
omnipresent deity.

Such were the principal gods worshipped in the Mexican valley at
the time of the conquest; there were many minor deities also, but
sufficient has been said to give some idea of the Mexican pantheon, and
to indicate its composite nature. Most of the gods were supposed to
dwell in supernatural regions such as Tlalocan, the eastern paradise
and home of Tlaloc which has already been mentioned, and Mictlan, the
underworld and home of Mictlantecutli, which consisted of nine spheres
in the lowest of which was a ninefold stream. Above were thirteen
heavens, in the first of which were certain planets, in the second the
Tzitzimimé, in the third the Centzon Mimizcoa, in the fourth birds, in
the fifth fire-snakes (comets) created by the fire-god, in the sixth
winds, in the seventh dust, in the eighth the gods. The rest were
reserved for Tonacatecutli and his consort, whose especial home was the
thirteenth and highest heaven.

The elements of Mexican religion then are twofold, and consist of
three classes of supernatural being, each bearing a direct relation to
the mode of life of their especial worshippers. These consist of the
rain- and fertility-deities of the agricultural peoples; the stellar
war- and hunting-gods of the nomadic tribes who were regarded in the
light of personal leaders; and the omnipotent creating-gods, such as
Tonacatecutli and Tezcatlipoca, common to both. The tribal gods of the
nomadic peoples seem to partake of the nature of fetishes in their
original forms, and to have been evolved from the “medicine bundles”
familiar to the student of North American ethnography. The more
cultured section of the first immigrants, who separated from the main
body and departed eastwards, are represented as taking with them their
god and leader, whose image was kept veiled in cloth; and allusion
has already been made to the statement that Quetzalcoatl’s image was
in early days kept similarly covered. Moreover a legend dealing with
the Aztec migration states that at an early stage of their wanderings
two bundles appeared miraculously in their camp, each of which was
appropriated by a section of the migrants. In one was found a jewel,
and its possessors finally became the inhabitants of Tlaltelolco,
while the other contained fire-sticks (continually associated with
hunting and stellar deities), and fell to the eventual inhabitants of
Tenochtitlan. Further evidence of the fetish nature of such gods is
seen in the stories which tell of struggles between different tribes
for the possession of a certain god. Thus we have the story of the
capture of the god of the immigrant hill-hunters by the sedentary
population around lake Pazcuaro in Michoacan; and the seizure by the
Chichimec of the two-headed deer of Camaxtli which was his war-fetish.
The same idea survived in the provision by the Mexicans within the
temple precincts of a prison-house where the idols of conquered tribes
were kept in durance; and it was no doubt based upon the belief that
once a people was deprived of the god who was its personal leader, its
prestige and power must necessarily vanish.

The worship of so many deities involved a cult of no little
elaboration, and it must be remembered that apart from the festivals
which were observed universally, each tribe, each province, each
quarter in Mexico, each guild (often the remains of a former tribe),
and each family were punctual in the observance of various domestic and
private rites; and though most of the literature which has come down to
us is concerned with the national worship, yet no doubt the domestic
cults, for the most part unchronicled, were regarded by the individual
as of greater importance, from the point of view that they had a more
direct bearing upon his personal prosperity.

Naturally the worship paid to the divine powers varied very greatly in
nature according to the mental and cultural status of the worshippers.
Many of the myths are extremely crude, and evidently the product of
a very low stage of civilization; but on the other hand, many of the
prayers given by Sahagun show a high degree of spirituality. The
existence of a professional priesthood carefully trained in astronomy
and letters, together with the natural bent of the American mind
towards poetic imagery, fostered the evolution of beliefs among the
more educated which no doubt differed as much in quality from the
superstitions of the populace as those of the higher classes in Peru or
in India. Rites which in appearance were crude and savage possessed for
the adept a symbolic and esoteric meaning which transformed, even if
it did not entirely excuse, their barbarity. Symbolism is the keynote
of American ritual, and it is this symbolism which makes the religious
manuscripts so difficult of interpretation.

Though practically all the supernatural powers were personified in
human form, yet traces are found of more direct worship of nature in
Tlaxcala, where, according to Motolinia, altars were erected to trees,
and four altars might be found arranged round a spring. Indications
of tree-worship were also found among the Mixtec who were said to
make offerings to the shadows of lofty trees. In Oaxaca, among the
Mixtec and Zapotec, traces of a different kind of religion make their
appearance. It is true that here too (in parts of the Mixtec territory)
we have immigration legends, pointing to the supposition that a portion
of the population came from the north; but other, and probably older,
myths exist which narrate the birth of the human race from trees,
rocks and wild beasts. Myths of this nature are far more typical of
Peru as a whole than of Mexico and Central America. Another peculiarity
of Mixtec and Zapotec worship is the great number of cave-temples,
many of them so holy that they became centres of pilgrimage. Some of
these shrines were oracular, and one of them, at Achiutla, held such
a high reputation that Montecuzoma sent an embassy to consult it at
the coming of the Spaniards. Human sacrifice was practised by both
these tribes, though to a far less extent than by the Mexicans, the
heart of the victim being held to the lips of the idol of stone or
wood. Traces of lake-worship also occur, another point in common with
Peru and Colombia, in so far as at Tecomastlahuaca (immediately S.E.
of Cuicatlan) was a sacred lake into which the bodies of victims were
thrown; and at Teotitlan was a celebrated idol which was said to have
descended from heaven in the form of a bird in the midst of a luminous
constellation, a myth which would seem to have certain Maya affinities,
as will be seen later. At Cuilapa in the Zapotec country was current
a creation legend not unlike some of the Mexican ætiological myths.
According to this the creator and his progeny bore calendrical names,
and these semi-deities built their palaces on a huge rock on the summit
of which was a copper axe, with the edge upwards, supporting the
heavens. This preliminary age was terminated by a great deluge, after
which the creator repeopled the world with the human race.




       CHAPTER III--MEXICO: THE CALENDAR AND CALENDRICAL FEASTS


Mexican ritual was so closely connected with the elaborate calendar
that some explanation of the latter is necessary before it is possible
to give an intelligible description of the various rites and ceremonies
by which the favour of the gods was sought. The origin of this calendar
is obscure, and can only be discussed in relation to the Maya calendar,
with which it is obviously connected; so it will be best to leave this
question to a later page, stating here only that in Mexico it was
supposed to be the invention of Quetzalcoatl, and transmitted to the
Nahua peoples through the agency of the two prototypes of magicians,
Oxomoco and Cipactonal. The Mexican calendar is twofold, and comprises
a ritual calendar, with a round of 260 days, which was employed in
divination and for the fixing of certain “movable feasts,” and a solar
calendar, with a round of 365 days, according to which the seasonal
feasts were held. The method of naming the individual days was the same
for both, and consisted in the combination of twenty pictorial signs
(Fig. 7) with the numbers one to thirteen. The signs were as follows
(see Appendix I):

1. _Cipactli._ The head of a monstrous animal, identified now
with the alligator, now with the sword-fish, and appearing in the
manuscripts sometimes with legs and sometimes with fins. According to
legend, the earth was created from the primordial cipactli, and the
irregularities of the earth’s surface are due to the scaly prominences
on the animal’s back. The date 1. cipactli is given as that of the
creation, and the sign is especially associated with Tonacatecutli and
fruitfulness.

2. _Eecatl._ The head of the wind-god; typifying instability.

3. _Calli._ A house, implying rest; associated with Tepeyollotl.

4. _Quetzpalin._ A lizard, associated with the rising of the water
and fertility; also with a god Ueuecoyotl (the “Old Wolf”).

  [Illustration: FIG. 7.--Mexican day signs.

    _a._ cipactli.
    _b._ eecatl.
    _c._ calli.
    _d._ quetzpalin.
    _e._ coatl.
    _f._ miquiztli.
    _g._ mazatl.
    _h._ tochtli.
    _i._ atl.
    _j._ itzcuintli.
    _k._ ozomatli.
    _l._ malinalli.
    _m._ acatl.
    _n._ ocelotl.
    _o._ quauhtli.
    _p._ cozcaquahtli.
    _q._ olin.
    _r._ tecpatl.
    _s._ quiauitl.
    _t._ xochitl.

(_Fejérváry-Mayer MS., Liverpool_)]

5. _Coatl._ A snake, typifying poverty and homelessness;
associated with Chalchiuhtlicue.

6. _Miquiztli._ The head of Mictlantecutli, an unlucky sign.

7. _Mazatl._ The head or hoof of a deer; unlucky because the deer
typifies timidity; associated with Tlaloc.

8. _Tochtli._ A rabbit, good luck and fertility; associated with
Mayauel.

9. _Atl._ Water, unlucky, typifying floods and death; associated
with Xiuhtecutli.

10. _Itzcuintli._ A dog (sometimes the ear only is shown), rank
and riches; associated with Mictlantecutli.

11. _Ozomatli._ A monkey, implies cleverness and craftsmanship,
combined with instability; associated with Xochipilli.

12. _Malinalli._ Grass, sometimes shown as a jaw-bone with grass
hair, unlucky; associated with Patecatl.

13. _Acatl._ A reed, implying emptiness; associated with
Itztlacoliuhqui.

14. _Ocelotl._ An ocelot (sometimes the ear only is shown);
success in war and love, but suggesting a death by sacrifice (the
typical death of a warrior). Associated with Tlazolteotl.

15. _Quauhtli._ An eagle, implying courage in war; associated with
Xipe.

16. _Cozcaquauhtli._ A vulture, signifying old age; associated
with Itzpapalotl.

17. _Olin._ A sign emblematical of movement (used also to signify
an earthquake). Variable in fortune, and associated with Nanauatzin.

18. _Tecpatl._ A stone knife, the emblem of drought and sterility,
associated with Tezcatlipoca.

19. _Quiauitl._ The head of Tlaloc, emblem of rain; an unlucky
sign.

20. _Xochitl._ A flower, implying good craftsmanship; associated
with Xochiquetzal.

These signs ran consecutively in the order given above, one being
assigned to each day, and the series was repeated _ad infinitum_.
Conjointly with them were repeated the numerals 1 to 13; e.g. 1.
cipactli, 2. eecatl, 3. calli, and so on to 13. acatl, which was
followed by 1. ocelotl, 2. quauhtli, and so forth. There being no
common factor to the numbers 13 and 20, a period of 13 × 20 days, or
260, would elapse before the sign 1. cipactli would recur. This period
of 260 days constituted the ritual and divinatory calendar, known
as the _tonalamatl_. The tonalamatl was subdivided in various
ways; in some manuscripts each of the twenty thirteen-day periods,
or “weeks,” is shown separately, together with the figure of a god
who was especially associated with the first day, but whose influence
was supposed to extend over the whole “week.” The deities presiding
over the successive “weeks” of the tonalamatl are given in one MS.
(Vaticanus A) as follows, the date preceding the name of each being
that of the first day of each “week.”

    1. cipactli, Tonacatecutli.
    1. ocelotl, Quetzalcoatl.
    1. mazatl, Tepeyollotl.
    1. xochitl, Ueuecoyotl.
    1. acatl, Chalchiuhtlicue.
    1. miquiztli, Tonatiuh.
    1. quiauitl, Tlaloc.
    1. malinalli, Mayauel.
    1. coatl, Tlauizcalpantecutli.
    1. tecpatl, Tonatiuh.
    1. ozomatli, Patecatl.
    1. quetzpalin, Itztlacoliuhqui.
    1. olin, Tlazolteotl.
    1. itzcuintli, Xipe.
    1. calli, Itzpapalotl.
    1. cozcaquauhtli, Xolotl.
    1. atl, Chalchiuhtlicue.
    1. eecatl, Chantico.
    1. quauhtli, Xochiquetzal.
    1. tochtli, Itztli.

There is however some variation in the assignment the week-gods, e.g.
Sahagun gives 1. miquiztli to Tezcatlipoca, 1. acatl to Quetzalcoatl,
1. tecpatl to Uitzilopochtli, etc. Within the weeks, many individual
days were associated with certain deities, such as 4. olin and
12. itzcuintli with the sun, 5. itzcuintli and 6. quetzpalin with
Mictlantecutli, but for a list of these the reader may be referred to
Sahagun. Apart from the signs of the days themselves, the presiding
deities of the weeks, and the gods of the individual dates, the
numerical signs also possessed a lucky or unlucky connotation. Three
and four were good numbers, five and six generally bad, seven always
good, eight and nine bad, ten, eleven, twelve and thirteen good.
Consequently the diviner was obliged to take into account all these
possible influences, which in many cases might be contradictory, in
considering the fortune attached to a particular day. In some MSS.
the tonalamatl is arranged on a different system, viz. in five long
horizontal rows of fifty-two days each. Each row, and each vertical
column of five days, is provided with a presiding deity or symbol,
the influence of which must be assessed. Nor have we yet come to an
end of the factors which must be taken into consideration, but before
proceeding it will be necessary to explain the solar calendar.

The Mexicans reckoned 365 days to the solar year, which they divided
into eighteen months of twenty days each, and a nineteenth period of
five days, considered extremely unlucky, at the end of the year. As
the days were known by their tonalamatl names, it is obvious that the
first 115 days of the year recurred at the end. But it was possible
to distinguish between two days of the same name which fell in the
same year, owing to the fact that each day was associated with one
of a series of nine deities, called “lords of the night,” a series
also repeated _ad infinitum_, save that no “lord” was assigned
to any of the five unlucky days at the end of the year, which were
called _nemontemi_ or “useless days.” Thus, since the number 260
is not divisible by 9, it was possible to differentiate between two
days of the same name falling in one year; and since 9 goes into 360
without remainder, the commencement of the year coincided with the
commencement of the series of “lords of the night.” These lords of the
night are indicated by the heads or symbols of the following gods: 1.
Xiuhtecutli, 2. Itztli, 3. Tonatiuh, 4. Cinteotl, 5. Mictlantecutli,
6. Chalchiuhtlicue, 7. Tlazolteotl, 8. Tepeyollotl and 9. Tlaloc. Nor
is this all, a corresponding series of thirteen “lords of day,” which
however is not similarly composed in all MSS., accompanied the days
(omitting the nemontemi), and the influences of the day- and night-lord
assigned to each day respectively constituted two additional features
for the consideration of the would-be interpreter of the tonalamatl. It
is perhaps hardly necessary to state that the reading of the book of
days was in the hands of a professional priesthood and required much
study to perform correctly.

Since each “month” consisted of twenty days, and there were twenty
day-signs, it is obvious that each month in a given year began with the
same sign; but since the last month was followed by the five unlucky
days, it follows that each year began with a day-sign five days later
than the last. Also since 365 is divisible by 13 with 1 as remainder,
it follows equally that each year began with a day-number one in
advance of the last. Further, since there were twenty day-signs, and
five (the least common multiple of 365 and 20) goes into twenty exactly
four times, the year began with one of four signs only. Now the year
was always distinguished by the sign of the day on which it began, and
it is a peculiar fact that the commencement of the year never coincided
with the commencement of the tonalamatl. The four signs which give the
names to the years are the signs tecpatl, calli, tochtli and acatl,
recurring in that order. Whether the day-number entering into the name
of the year was that of the first day, as held by most authorities,
or of the first day of the fifth month, as Seler tries to prove, need
not be discussed here; the fact remains that the years were named
successively, 1. tecpatl, 2. calli, 3. tochtli, and so on, until, after
a period of fifty-two years (13 × 4), the same sign occurred again with
the same number as the name-date of the year. This period of fifty-two
years constituted the shorter cycle of the Mexicans, the longer cycle
consisting of twice that number; but before proceeding further it will
be necessary to say something about the months (see Appendix II).

The first month was called Atlcaualco, and the first day according
to Sahagun, who wrote about the middle of the sixteenth century,
corresponded with the 2nd of February. This month marked the cessation
of the rains,[3] and it was represented in calendars by a figure of
the god Tlaloc, to whom, together with Chalchiuhtlicue, the religious
festivals of the month were especially dedicated. Large numbers of
children were sacrificed to the rain-god, chiefly on mountains, but
also at a certain deep hole in the lagoon, and it was considered a good
omen if the small victims wept on their way to the place of sacrifice,
since their tears were supposed to portend a plentiful rain-supply. A
gladiatorial sacrifice was also made to Xipe during this month.

The second month, Tlacaxipeualiztli, commencing February 22nd, was
dedicated to Xipe, and is indicated in MSS. by a figure of this god.
Warriors who had taken prisoners in battle brought them to the temple
of Uitzilopochtli, holding them by the hair. Here their hearts were
offered to the god, their bodies cast down the temple steps and flayed,
and their skins assumed by their captors. In the temple of Xipe,
called Yopico, elaborate gladiatorial sacrifices were held during
this month, in which captives, tethered one by one by a rope to the
centre of a circular stone (Fig. 5, _b_; p. 41), were attacked by
four warriors in ocelot and eagle dresses. If the victim could defend
himself against these, a fifth opponent attacked him, a left-handed
man being selected for this purpose. When overpowered, the victim
was sacrificed, either by having his heart torn out, or by being
fastened to a frame-work and shot with darts (Fig. 5, _a_). The
gladiatorial sacrifice is symbolical of war, and the creation-myths
relate how the gods called into being special bands of warriors whose
blood and hearts should be devoted to the nourishment of the sun and
the earth. War, therefore, was necessary, in order that the processes
of nature might continue without hindrance, and war amongst the
Mexicans had thus assumed a ceremonial character. The arrow-sacrifice
was apparently introduced from the Huaxtec country, together with
the worship of the earth-goddesses Ixcuinamé, of whom Tlazolteotl
was the chief. It was practised also at Tlaxcala and Uexotzinco, as
explained above. Both this and the flaying sacrifice partook of the
nature of imitative magic, and had as their object the promotion of
fertility, a matter which at this time of the year was of considerable
importance to the Mexicans. For the ordinary form of sacrifice (Fig. 5,
_c_) the victim, stripped of his ornaments, was stretched on the
sacrificial stone, which was slightly convex in shape. Five priests,
called Chalmeca, held his arms, legs and head, while the sacrificer
slashed open his breast with a stone knife, and, inserting his hand in
the wound, tore out the heart, which was held for a moment to the lips
of the idol, or offered to the sun, and then cast into a stone vase,
called quauhxicalli, or burnt. Many of the so-called “calendar stones”
are possibly elaborate quauhxicalli; a good example of the normal type
is figured on Pl. VII, 1. In most cases the body was hurled down
the steps of the temple to the court, where it was seized by certain
priests and carried away to be dismembered. For sacrifice was sometimes
accompanied by cannibalism, though it is interesting to note that at
the festival just described the warrior who provided a captive for
sacrifice was debarred from eating his flesh, since he was supposed
to stand to the victim in the relation of father to son. At this
feast, before the body was cast down the steps, the sacrificing priest
inserted a tube in the cavity left after the removal of the heart, and
extracted a bowlful of blood, which he gave to the victim’s master. The
latter with this made the round of certain temples, smearing a little
of the blood on the lips of the various images.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE VII_

  MEXICO

  (Scale, 1, ⅙th: 2, ¹⁄₃₀th)



    _British Museum_

  1

  1. STONE QUAUHXICALLI (VASE IN WHICH THE HEARTS OF VICTIMS WERE
  DEPOSITED)]

  [Illustration:

    _Photo. C. B. Waite_      _Mexico Museum_

  2

  2. STONE QUAUHXICALLI IN THE FORM OF AN OCELOT]

The third month, Tozoztontli, began on March 14th, and is signified in
MSS. by the figure of a maize-goddess. It was a month of first-fruits;
children were sacrificed to Tlaloc, and the first flowers were offered
in Xipe’s temple, after which ceremony, but not before, their perfume
might be inhaled by mortals. The flower-sellers also held a festival
in honour of Coatlicue, and those who had provided victims for the
sacrifices during the preceding month, discarded the skins which they
had worn until now.

The fourth month, Uei tozoztli, beginning on April 3rd, is also
represented by the figure of a maize-god, and the presiding deities
were Cinteotl and Chicome Coatl. The ceremonies observed concerned the
maize-plant, which was used to decorate the altars and temples, while
the selected heads destined to be used as seed were offered by young
maidens to the above divinities. A peculiar offering was made to the
household images of the harvest-god, consisting of baskets of produce,
each surmounted by a cooked frog which bore on its back, in a miniature
basket, specimens of each of the varieties of grain which composed the
offering.

The fifth month, Toxcatl, beginning on April 23rd, was symbolized by a
figure of Tezcatlipoca, and was the occasion of the feast which has so
often been described; at which a young man, identified with the god,
was sacrificed to him after a year spent in the enjoyment of every
luxury that Mexican civilization could afford. The identification of
the victim with the god was a frequent feature of Mexican sacrificial
ceremonies, and may have been based on the idea, found in many other
parts of the world, that, just as the earthly representative of the
deity was never allowed to attain old age, so the youthful vigour
of the divinity remained unimpaired throughout the years. It may be
remarked in this connection that one of the chief characteristics of
Tezcatlipoca was perennial youth. A similar, though less important,
ceremony was held in honour of Uitzilopochtli in this month.

The sixth month, commencing on May 13th, was called Etzalqualiztli.
It was symbolized by a figure of Tlaloc, and ceremonies took place in
honour of the Tlaloque. Aquatic plants were gathered by the priests
for the manufacture of mats on which the offerings were placed in
the shape of small balls of flour-paste; great care was necessary in
setting out the latter, since if one rolled, the movement was taken as
a sign that the officiating priest had infringed some law, and he was
severely punished. When the priests set out to gather the reeds, they
were permitted by custom to rob any passer-by whom they might meet;
they joined in a ceremonial bath in the lake, imitating the motions and
cries of aquatic birds, and finally offered a number of human victims
who were adorned in the dress and ornaments of the rain-gods. During
these ceremonies severe punishment was inflicted upon priests who had
broken any ceremonial rule during the year.

In Tecuiluitontli, the seventh month (June 2nd), typified by the figure
of Uixtociuatl, the festival of this, the goddess of salt, was held.
Flowers played a large part in the ceremonies, and the sacrifices
consisted of a woman, identified with the goddess, and a number of
captives.

Uei tecuiluitl, the eighth month (June 22nd), was devoted to Xilonen,
and the figure of a noble (or of Xochipilli) appears as its symbol.
During the festivals, large distributions of provisions were made by
the rich, since this season was wont to be one of scarcity, for as
yet it was not lawful to make use of the new crop of maize. Special
features of the ceremonials were a dance by accredited warriors clad
in all their _insignia_, and the sacrifice, in the temple of
Cinteotl, of a woman dressed as the goddess. The victim was taken
by one of the priests on his back, and in that position she was
decapitated, and her heart offered. The chicauaztli or rattle-staff,
a rain-charm, played a prominent part in the ceremonies, which were
essentially of the nature of a removal of a tabu from the maize-crop.

Tlaxochimaco, the ninth month (July 12th), was symbolized either by a
figure of Uitzilopochtli or of a mummy; and on this occasion the god
appeared in benevolent guise. The festival was a flower-feast, and
quantities of blossoms were collected to be offered as first-fruits to
the god. It comes as a welcome relief to note that no human victims
were offered during these ceremonies, which must have afforded a
spectacle of great beauty.

The tenth month, Xocouetzi (August 1st), however, made up in
gruesomeness for the simplicity of the last. A festival was held in
honour of Xiuhtecutli, the figure of a mummy appearing as symbol, and
the terrible fire-sacrifice mentioned on p. 53 was made. A feature
of the proceedings was the erection of a lofty pole, surmounted by a
figure of the god made of flour-paste, and the final ceremony consisted
in a contest on the part of the young men to swarm up the pole and
reach the figure, the victor being entitled to certain rewards and
_insignia_. Both the last two month-festivals had a certain
connection with honours paid to the dead. During the latter the
Tlaxcalans especially performed rites in memory of deceased warriors
and princes.

Ochpaniztli, the eleventh month (August 21st), was symbolized by a
figure of Teteoinnan, in whose honour the ceremonies were held. A
woman, dressed as the goddess, was decapitated by a priest of Chicome
Coatl, and flayed, the skin from her thigh being made into a mask for
the priest of Cinteotl; she was not told of her fate, since it was of
great importance that she should not weep. Sacrifices were also made to
Uitzilopochtli, and the proceedings included a battle of flowers and
the distribution by the king of military rewards and _insignia_.
The skin-mask worn by the priest of Cinteotl was finally deposited on a
hostile frontier, and the occasion was often marked by a skirmish with
the foe who lay in wait for the escort.

Teotleco, the twelfth month (September 10th), symbolized by a figure of
Tezcatlipoca, was signalized by a feast in honour of all the gods, who
were believed to have left the country for a season, and were now about
to return. Tezcatlipoca, the god of perennial youth, was believed to
arrive in advance of the rest, while Yacatecutli and Xiuhtecutli came a
day after the main body; the former because, as the god of travelling
merchants, he might be supposed to have wandered further afield,
the latter because he was essentially the old god, and could not be
expected to travel so fast. For the arrival of the main body, a heap of
maize-meal was prepared by a priest, who visited it at intervals until
the mark of a footprint announced the arrival of the holy travellers;
this was the signal for universal rejoicing. A large amount of octli
was consumed, this proceeding being termed “washing the feet of the
gods.” The festival terminated with the burning alive of a number of
slaves.

Tepeiluitl, the thirteenth month (September 30th), ushered in the
festival in honour of the mountain-gods, and was signified by the
figure of a mountain with the head of Tlaloc. Numbers of snake-figures
of wood (emblems of the lightning) were prepared, as well as images
of the mountains in meal-paste, and certain victims, identified with
fertility-deities were sacrificed to Tlaloc. The festival was held
partly in honour of those who had perished by drowning or the lightning
stroke, or by some other death which necessitated burial as opposed to
cremation.

In Quecholli, the fourteenth month (October 20th), was held the
festival of Mixcoatl, whose figure appears as its symbol. A strict fast
was observed, during which large numbers of arrows were made, which
were offered in bundles of twenty to Uitzilopochtli. Miniature arrows
were deposited on the graves of the dead, and, on the tenth day, a
great communal hunt was organized, on the mountain called Zacatepec, in
which various surrounding tribes joined. A victim, the representative
of the god, was offered to Mixcoatl, and a number of slaves to
Tezcatlipoca; some of the latter being carried up the temple steps
bound hand and foot like captive deer.

Panquetzaliztli, the fifteenth month (November 9th), ushered in the
great feast of Uitzilopochtli, whose figure is shown as its emblem.
The proceedings were symbolical in part of the mythical fight between
this god and his hostile brothers, the Centzon Uitznaua, since a
great ceremonial combat was organized between the slaves destined
as sacrifices. In this one party represented the god, the other the
Uitznaua, and a great figure of the Xiuhcoatl, the mythical weapon of
Uitzilopochtli, figured later in the proceedings. During the fight, the
image of Paynal made a rapid ceremonial tour of certain temples, and
the sacrifice which terminated the festival was accompanied by music.

In the sixteenth month, Atemoztli (November 29th), the first rains
usually appeared in the mountains (according to Sahagun, but see
footnote on p. 65), and sacrifices were offered to Tlaloc, who appears
as the symbol. Figures of the mountain-gods were made from meal-paste,
and these were “sacrificed” with a weaver’s sword.

The seventeenth month, Tititl (December 19th), was symbolized by a
figure of Ilamatecutli, whose representative, a woman, was sacrificed
in the ordinary way in the temple of Uitzilopochtli, though her head
was immediately removed, and carried by the officiating priest in the
ceremonial dance which followed.

The last month, Izcalli (January 8th), was dedicated to Xiuhtecutli,
whose portrait appears as emblem. Various land and water animals were
captured by children and young men, who gave them to the officiating
priest to cast into the sacrificial fire before the god. Human
sacrifice was offered only every fourth year, and the ears of children
born in the interval were pierced in the presence of the god.

The remaining five days of the year, called Nemontemi, were regarded
as extremely unfortunate. No work was done, and the people went out as
little as possible, for an evil omen encountered during this period was
regarded as doubly unlucky. In particular every attempt was made to
avoid quarrelling and dispute, and the time was one of general inaction.

The feasts of the solar calendar have been detailed at some length in
order to give an idea of the nature of Mexican religious practice,
and to show to what an extent religious observances entered into the
life of the people. Those who desire fuller particulars will find them
in Sahagun’s great work. Space forbids a description of the various
ceremonies relating to certain individual days of the ritual calendar
or tonalamatl, but that performed on the day 4. olin, sacred to
Tonatiuh, deserves short mention. A prisoner, in merchant’s dress, was
taken to the shrine called Quauhcalli and set upon a large stone carved
with the image of the sun. Standing thus he declaimed a message to the
god, with which he had been entrusted, and was forthwith stripped of
his ornaments and sacrificed upon the stone itself. Seler conjectures
that the famous so-called “calendar-stone” in the Mexican museum is
the stone to which reference is made in this account. This magnificent
specimen of the Mexican stone-mason’s art is figured on Pl. VIII, 1,
and a schematic drawing is seen in Fig. 8. The outer band of decoration
is formed by two fire-snakes, each with a human face in its mouth. At
the top, in a square cartouche, is the glyph 13. acatl, the date of
birth of the historical sun (see p. 51). The day-signs in order form
an inner ornamental band, and in the centre is a large olin glyph,
accompanied by the number 4, and with a sun-face in the middle. Within
the arms of the olin are sculptured the calendrical names of the four
previous suns, and in the interspaces are the glyphs 1. tecpatl, the
sign used for the name of Montecuzoma, 1. quiauitl, and 7. ozomatli,
the significance of which has not yet been satisfactorily explained.
Outside the day-signs are seen the pointed emblems which typify the
rays of the sun, which enter also into the glyph by which the Mexicans
expressed the meaning “year” (Fig. 86, _l_; p. 356).

Two other special festivals connected with the solar calendar call for
mention. The first of these occurred every eight years, in the month of
Quecholli or Tepeiluitl; it was called Atamalqualiztli, and during it
only bread and water were consumed, with the intention of letting other
food-products rest. An image of Tlaloc was set up, and the worshippers
performed a ceremonial dance clad in various animal costumes. An
interesting feature of the ceremonies was the following: In front of
the image of the god was a tank of water, containing frogs and snakes.
A number of men called Mazateca, perhaps inhabitants of the Mazatec
district, tried to seize one of these animals in his mouth, without
using his hands, and having succeeded, continued to dance with it in
his teeth. The custom has a strange resemblance to the snake-dance
performed by the Pueblo Indians up to the present time.

  [Illustration: FIG. 8.--Key to the “calendar-stone”
  figured on Pl. VIII, 1.]

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE VIII_

  MEXICO

  (Scale: 1, ¹⁄₅₀th; 2, ⅙th)



    _Photo. C. B. Waite_      _Mexico Museum_

  1

  1. THE “CALENDAR STONE”]

  [Illustration:

    _British Museum_

  2

  2. STONE FIGURE OF AN OCTLI GOD]

  [Illustration: FIG. 9.--Priests making new fire.

  (_Zouche MS., British Museum_)]

The other festival was that which occurred every fifty-two years,
when the year-date 2. acatl recurred. The occasion was considered as
especially dangerous to mortal men, since it was feared that the sun
might fail to rise, and the Tzitzimimé demons would descend from the
first heaven to destroy mankind and so bring about the end of the
world. The principal feature of the ceremonies was the production
of new fire by means of the ceremonial fire-sticks (Fig. 9), and it
was upon the successful performance of this operation that the rising
of the sun was supposed to depend. On the eve of the new year all
fires were extinguished, and the priests started in procession to the
top of the mountain Uixachtlan, outside Mexico, timing their arrival
just before midnight. At midnight, which was calculated by observation
of the Pleiades, the high-priest of the Calpulco quarter of Mexico,
kindled the new fire on the breast of a prisoner, who was sacrificed
immediately after in the usual manner. Representatives of the
surrounding cities were present, and torches lit at the new fire were
rapidly carried to the chief temples in each city, where the populace
awaited their arrival in the greatest anxiety. From the temples the
fire was distributed all over the city, and universal rejoicings hailed
the commencement of a new era and the deliverance of the world from
universal destruction. Old garments were discarded, and all household
utensils were broken or freshly painted in token of the new lease
of life given to mankind. A peculiar custom in connection with these
ceremonies is seen in the fact that women expecting to become mothers,
and young children, were made to assume masks of maguey leaves, and
the former were shut up in the granaries. It was feared that women in
this condition might become monsters and devour their relations, and
that the children might be turned into mice, especially if they were
allowed to fall asleep. New fire was also made at the dedication of a
new temple, or the completion of a new house.

The employment by the Mexicans of a solar year of 365 days brings us to
the question whether they at any time intercalated any day or days to
make their year square with real solar time. It is quite obvious that
a people, most of whose feasts were connected with agriculture, were
bound to notice that their festivals gradually failed to correspond
with the seasons, and many conjectures have been made regarding the
methods which they might have used to rectify their calendar. It
must be confessed however that there is no direct evidence that days
were ever intercalated in the latter, and Seler has shown that at
any rate between the year of the conquest, and the date of Sahagun’s
writing, some forty years, no intercalation had been made. Moreover
the confusion into which the calendar had fallen at the beginning of
the sixteenth century seems to be evidence against the practice. It is
quite possible that when the discrepancy became too great a new start
was made, and it may be that the five “suns” typifying the five ages
of the world really represent five attempts to establish a calendar.
The sun was not the only body the observation of which served as a
check upon the calendar. The planet Venus was also of the greatest
importance, and its synodical revolution was closely connected with the
104-year period which constituted the longer cycle of the Mexicans.
This revolution occupies practically 584 days, and consequently
five such revolutions are equal to eight years of 365 days. Since 20
when divided into 584 leaves a remainder of 4, it is obvious that
the commencement of a Venus-period will fall always on one of five
of the twenty day-signs. Further, since 13 when divided into 584
leaves a remainder of 12, it is equally obvious that each successive
Venus-period will open with a day of which the numerical sign is one
less than that of the preceding period. In several of the MSS. we have
the Venus-periods set out in the order in which they occur, viz. on the
days cipactli, coatl, atl, acatl and olin; 1. cipactli being followed
by 13. coatl, the latter by 12. atl, and so forth. It can be seen that
65 Venus-periods must elapse before the same sign occurs in conjunction
with the same number at the commencement of a period, and this amounts
to 104 years of 365 days, viz. the longer cycle of the Mexicans. It
seems most probable that the Venus-period was utilized as a means of
correcting the 365-day year, and I am even inclined to believe that
observation of this planet was practised before the institution of the
solar calendar. But I shall recur to this point when the subject of
the Maya calendar is discussed; meanwhile it is worthy of note that
the signs of the two last “suns” are atl and olin, signs which occur
as the commencing-days of Venus-periods; that the historical sun was
supposed to have been born on 13. acatl; and that the new fire ceremony
always took place in the year 2. acatl. Though the morning star played
such an important part in the regulation of the calendar, it was not
regarded altogether as a beneficent deity, possibly because of its
association with war and sacrifice among the hunting peoples. However
that may be, its light when it first rose was considered to exercise
a baneful effect upon mankind, and chimneys were carefully stopped up
to prevent the rays from entering the houses. The cult of Venus was
especially practised at Teotitlan and Tehuacan, where the priests had
the reputation of being great calendrical experts. A human sacrifice
was performed at the first rising of the star, and offerings of blood
and incense were made daily until it commenced to decline. A tradition
existed also that the planet was supposed to “shoot” certain classes
of individuals in certain signs, and it is interesting to note that in
manuscripts the deity in whom it is personified, Tlauizcalpantecutli,
is constantly shown hurling darts at other gods and certain animals.

Connected with the calendar was the peculiar regard which the Mexicans
paid to the “world-directions.” The points of the compass were known
by the following names: east, Tlapcopa; north, Mictlampa; west,
Ciuatlampa; and south, Uitzlampa. To these a fifth, the central point,
was generally added, and, in some cases, the directions up and down.
With the east were associated all years with the acatl sign, the
paradise Tlalocan, the colour yellow, and the gods Tonatiuh and Itztli.
With the north, tecpatl-years, the underworld Mictlan, the colour red,
the god Mictlantecutli. In the west was the home of the female deities,
especially the earth- and fertility-goddesses, and with it were
associated the calli-years and the colour blue. To the south belonged
the tochtli-years, the colour white and the god Tlaloc. With the centre
the figure of Xiuhtecutli, the god of the hearth-fire, is constantly
associated. Other gods are associated also with the four quarters, but
the MSS. are often contradictory. The day-signs were divided as follows:

East: cipactli, acatl, coatl, olin, atl.

North: ocelotl, miquiztli, tecpatl, itzcuintli, eecatl.

West: mazatl, quiauitl, ozomatli, calli, quauhtli.

South: xochitl, malinalli, quetzpalin, cozcaquauhtli, tochtli.

In the MSS. the quarters are often typified by four trees, each
springing from the body of the earth-goddess, with a bird perched
amidst its branches, and accompanied by the five day-signs belonging
to the quarter which it represents (Fig. 10). In Oaxaca, where the
52-year cycle was also observed, the years were assigned in groups of
thirteen to the quarters. Those belonging to the east were supposed
to be fertile and healthy; those to the north, variable; those to the
west, good for mankind but bad for crops; while those to the south were
thought to be characterized by excessive heat and drought.

  [Illustration: FIG. 10.--The Tree of the West.

  (_Borgia MS., Rome_)]

Among the Tarascans too were found gods associated with the
world-directions, and, as will be seen later, among the Maya also.
The association of the underworld with the north by the Mexicans is
interesting as exemplifying a tendency found amongst primitive peoples
all over the world. The original home of the Mexicans lay to the north,
and consequently it was to the north that departed spirits took their
way, just as in Polynesia and Melanesia the disembodied souls were
supposed to leap into the sea and disappear in the direction whence
their forefathers had arrived.

It is therefore particularly interesting to note that among the
Mixtec and Zapotec two spots were pointed out as the entrance to the
underworld, and that each of these spots lay in the actual territory
inhabited by these tribes respectively. The Mixtec believed that the
gate to the region of departed spirits was situated at Chalcatongo, and
the place was regarded as a burial-ground of peculiar sanctity. While
the Zapotec believed that their sacred city Mitla (or rather Lyobaa,
Mitla being the Nahua name) stood on the site of the approach to the
spirit-world. This belief, together with the peculiarities in religion
mentioned in the last chapter, points to the existence among the
population of a large element which may be called indigenous in so far
as its beliefs were probably evolved locally and before the advent of
the Nahua tribes in Mexico, by contact with whom they were so strongly
affected in later years.

In Mexican ceremonial constant attention was paid to the
world-directions, and the victim’s blood was often sprinkled, and
incense offered, in the four directions of the compass.

It will not be necessary to say many words on the subject of Mexican
ritual, since much can be gathered from the description of the
various feasts given above. In early times human sacrifice seems
to have been far from prevalent, and the Chichimec were reputed to
have made offerings only of animals and produce until they came
into contact with other tribes. But according to the “Annals of
Quauhtitlan,” human sacrifice had already made its appearance under
the Toltec _régime_. The first rite of this nature is said to
have been the offering of children to Tlaloc in 1018, while the
arrow-sacrifice was introduced from the Huaxtec country in 1058, and
the flaying-sacrifice in 1063. But the arrow-sacrifice is mentioned
elsewhere at a very early stage of the Nahua migration, in connection
with the earth-goddesses. Once introduced into the valley of Mexico,
the practice of making human offerings became more and more prevalent,
until we find the number of individuals slain during the four-day
ceremonies at the dedication of the great temple to Uitzilopochtli by
Auitzotl given in two manuscripts as twenty thousand (see Fig. 12;
p. 87). The Tezcocan ruler Nezahualcoyotl is said to have forbidden
it, and later to have limited it to prisoners of war, but at the time
of the conquest it showed no signs of abatement, and Bernal Diaz is
constantly referring to the sacrifices which he and his companions were
compelled to witness. Spaniards taken prisoner in the hostilities with
the Mexicans were invariably devoted to death, and the same chronicler
relates the grisly discovery in a temple at Pueblo Morisco of the
remains of two of his compatriots, where Sandoval found two “faces
which had been flayed, and the skin tanned like skin for gloves, the
beards left on, and they had been placed as offerings on one of the
altars.” The hides of four horses were found at the same place. But
terrible as such rites may seem to us, it may be taken as certain
that they were regarded almost with equanimity by the Mexicans. Death
by sacrifice was considered the normal death of a fighting man, and
ensured entrance to the paradise of the Sun. Instances occur where men
have deliberately demanded death on the sacrificial stone, notably
the king Chimamalpopoca is said to have made arrangements for his own
immolation, clad in the _insignia_ of Uitzilopochtli. Or again,
the Tlaxcalan general Tlahuicol, captured by the Mexicans, who refused
his freedom at the hands of Montecuzoma, and subsequently even the rank
of general in the Mexican army, and was so persistent in his demands
for death on the gladiatorial stone that it was at length granted him.
The very cannibalism which, to a limited extent, formed the occasional
sequel to human sacrifice, becomes divested of much of its horror when
it is remembered that the rite was, in essentials, an act of communion
with the deity, with whom the victim was identified. Instances of this
identification have been mentioned, and it has been said that the
victim, especially he who was condemned to die by the gladiatorial
sacrifice, was clad in the _insignia_ of the old stellar war-
and hunting-deities, Mixcoatl and the Morning Star, _insignia_
which are often borne by Uitzilopochtli and the earth-goddesses. The
ornament, which was regarded as that typical of the sacrificial victim,
was the following: the body and face were painted white with yellow
stripes, lips and chin red, and across the eyes was the black “mask”
seen in the figures of the star-gods. The hair was covered with down,
and the victim carried arrows and a sword tipped and edged with the
same material, which also appeared in five bunches on his shield (Fig.
12; p. 87).

The act of communion with the god is seen in the many festivals at
which an idol of the deity was made of some edible substance, later
to be eaten by the worshippers. This custom was followed also by the
Totonac.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE IX_



    _British Museum_

  MEXICO

    1. CENSER OF CHOLULA WARE
    2. POTTERY FIGURINE; COATLICUE. MEXICAN VALLEY
    3.    „    HEAD FROM TEOTIHUACAN
    4–5.  „    HEADS OF WARRIORS. MEXICAN VALLEY
    6.    „    FIGURINE; XOCHIQUETZAL. MEXICAN VALLEY

  MAYA

  7–11. POTTERY FIGURINES FROM GRAVES IN BRITISH
  HONDURAS

  (Scale: 1, ⅐th; 2–6, ⅜ths; 7–11, ¼th)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 11.--Totonac stone relief, from
  Huilocintla, near Tuxpan.]

Human sacrifice was of course reserved for the more important feasts,
the offerings on lesser occasions consisting chiefly of incense,
quails and the worshipper’s own blood. Incense, mixed with tobacco,
was offered on every occasion, and the incense-pouch is shown in the
MSS. as the invariable accompaniment of priests. It was consumed in
pottery braziers (Pl. IX, 1, and Figs. 4, _e_, and 36, 1, pp. 36
and 185), and visitors of great distinction were greeted by censing,
a compliment which was continually paid to the Spaniards on their
first arrival. Blood drawn by the worshipper from ears, tongue, arms
or legs, was offered on most occasions, and this rite was invariably
performed as an act of penance every time that he wished to attain
ceremonial purity. The usual implement was a spine of the aloe, which,
covered with blood, was offered to the god, but implements of bone
were also employed, especially for piercing the ears. An elaboration
of this ceremony consisted in passing rods through the tongue, and
at the principal festival, in March, to Camaxtli at Tlaxcala, the
chief priest was supposed to pass no less than 405 specially prepared
rods through that organ, the other worshippers being satisfied with a
smaller number. This performance is well illustrated in a relief from
Huilocintla in the Totonac region (Fig. 11), which bears a distinctly
Mayan appearance, and, as will be seen later, the Maya themselves were
much addicted to the practice. Upon the proper periodical observance of
this penitential act, accompanied by ceremonial fasting, the Mexican
believed his material prosperity, to a great extent, to depend. By
this means a person born on an unlucky day might avert much of his
destined ill-fortune, while a man born under a lucky sign would forfeit
by neglect the prosperity which it promised. Fasting played a very
important part in all ceremonies preliminary to religious festivals,
and was a condition of ritual purity; it consisted in partaking of
but one meal a day, of abstinence from flesh and octli, and of rigid
continence. Penitential acts and fasting, together with the making
of offerings to certain gods, were prescribed by the priests of
Tlazolteotl for those who made confession before them. The fact that
confession was practised by the Mexicans was especially striking to
the Spaniards, and most of the early writers make some comment upon
the ceremony. The penitent approached the priest and signified his
desire to confess, and the priest consulted the tonalamatl to find a
propitious day for the occasion. When this arrived, sacrifice was made
to Xiuhtecutli by casting offerings into a fire specially kindled for
the purpose, and after an invocation to Tezcatlipoca, uttered by the
priest, the penitent made confession of his faults seated before the
latter, whom he regarded as the representative of the god. Sahagun
states that small offences alone were confessed by the young, and that
it was only the elders who made acknowledgment of serious sins, for it
was believed that pardon could only be granted once for a particular
fault. Absolution, however, was complete, and seems to have freed
the penitent from temporal punishment. Sahagun states that in the
early days of Christianity, natives would come to the monasteries to
confess, and then ask for a certificate from the priests which they
might show to the alcade or governor in order that their offence might
be wiped out in the eyes of the temporal law also. Before confession
the penitent took an oath to tell the truth, by touching the ground
with a finger which he licked. This was the customary manner of
swearing, and the action was usually accompanied by the words, “In the
name of the Sun, in the name of our lady the Earth, I swear so-and-so,
and in ratification thereof I eat this earth.” This action was termed
“eating the earth in respect for the gods,” and was performed each time
a temple or shrine was entered.




               CHAPTER IV--MEXICO: WRITINGS, PRIESTHOOD,
                          MEDICINE AND BURIAL


So many of the manuscripts have a religious or calendrical
significance, that it may be as well to say here a few words about the
Mexican system of writing. The Indians of the North American plains
had evolved a sign-language, by means of which, under limitations, a
silent conversation could be carried on; further, they were in the
habit of recording events by painting figures and scenes on hide, or
weaving them in their wampum belts. The Mexican system was a little
more advanced; though events were expressed by the actual depiction of
the scenes, yet many of the details were purely symbolical, and names
were expressed by a figure or combination of figures which constitute
a rebus. Thus the name of the king, Itzcoatl, was written as a snake
(coatl) bristling with obsidian knives (itztli); the town of Tochtepec,
by a rabbit (tochtli) on a mountain (tepetl); that of Tenochtitlan, by
a stone (tetl), on which grows a cactus plant (nochtli), the syllable
_tlan_ being a place-termination.

  [Illustration:

   FIG. 12.--Detail from the historical portion of the
   Telleriano-Remensis MS.

   To the left, the date _7. tochtli_, accompanied by glyphs
   expressing the death of Tizoc and the accession of Auitzotl.
   To the right, the date _8. acatl_, with glyphs showing
   the dedication of the great temple to Uitzilopochtli, and the
   sacrifice of 20,000 prisoners.]

To express numbers, as far as the calendar was concerned, since no
figure higher than 13 occurred ordinarily, a dot was put for each unit.
There was also a special period-sign meaning a year (Fig. 86, _l_;
p. 356, usually combined with the day-sign from which that particular
year took its name), and another for the period of 52 years, called
_xiuhmolpilli_, or “sheaf of years.” As, however, there was no
subsidiary sign by which one xiuhmolpilli could be differentiated from
another, the reader is obliged to infer from the context the cycle to
which a particular year belongs. In the numeration of objects, as in
the tribute-lists, higher numbers are expressed by special symbols. The
Mexican numeral system was vigesimal, and hence the first special sign
was that for 20, a religious banner. 20 × 20, or 400, was expressed
by a tree; and 20 × 400 by an incense-pouch (see Fig. 12). In certain
portions of some manuscripts we find the lower numbers simplified by
the employment of a bar to mean five. These MSS. present other features
which are not typically Aztec in character, and it may at once be said
that the use of the bar to express five was universal in the Maya
countries, and extended in pre-Aztec times right up through the Zapotec
country (e.g. Monte Alban) and Cuernavaca (Xochicalco) to the Mexican
Valley (Island of Xico).

In the historical MSS. we have the year-signs in order accompanied by
certain figures symbolical of important events. A temple in flames
with a place-name attached signifies the conquest of a town; the sign
olin, an earthquake; a smoking star, a comet; and so forth. In Fig. 12
appears a small portion of the manuscript known as Telleriano-Remensis;
two year-dates are shown, of which the first, 7. tochtli, is
accompanied by two figures, a mummy-pack with the name of Tizoc, and
a seated man with the name of Auitzotl. This signifies the death of
the king Tizoc, and the enthronement of his successor. Accompanying
the next year-date, 8. acatl, is a picture of the great temple to
Uitzilopochtli, beneath which is a smoking fire-stick, and the
name-sign of Tenochtitlan. The group signifies the dedication of the
great temple at Mexico, since new fire was always made at the opening
of a newly-constructed building. At the side are two figures clad in
the livery of prisoners destined to the gladiatorial stone, each with
his name; these represent two important prisoners sacrificed on that
occasion, and below them is a number, reading 20,000, the number of the
victims sacrificed during the inaugural ceremonies.

The nature of the calendrical manuscripts has been explained in chapter
III, and it will therefore not be necessary to say more about them,
except that most, if not all, of the surviving examples seem not to be
pure Aztec work. Some are rather in Zapotec style, while others may
have been produced at Teotitlan or Tehuacan on the Mixtec border, where
the priests were especially skilled in calendrical lore; of others
again the place of origin may be Chiapas. Of great interest are the
tribute-lists, of which the best, known as Codex Mendoza, gives the
imperial revenue in the time of Montecuzoma, together with a list of
the tributary towns; the glyphs, in Fig. 18, p. 118, are taken from
this manuscript. Again, the ownership of land was carefully noted on
maps, territory belonging to the king, the nobles, and the calpulli (or
clans) being marked in different colours; and plans of towns are also
found, that shown in Fig. 13 in all probability representing the palace
at Tezcoco. Similar documents were prepared for legal procedure, and at
the landing of the Spaniards manuscripts were taken to Montecuzoma on
which were carefully noted the portraits of the leaders, together with
pictures of ships, horses, dogs and cannon.

  [Illustration: FIG. 13.--Plan of the palace at
  Tezcoco.

  (_Humboldt MSS., Berlin_)]

Maps and manuscripts were painted on fine cloth made of aloe- or
palm-fibre, paper made from the aloe, or dressed skins, the two former
being coated with a kind of size. The colours were applied with a
brush, which was moistened with the lips of the artist, and the designs
were invariably outlined in black. A considerable variety of colours
was employed, red from cochineal or log-wood; two yellows, vegetable
and mineral; blue from certain flowers; white from chalk, and black
from the soot of the ocotl palm. The mixing of colours was understood,
and brilliant greens, purples and browns are found.

It will be readily understood that the service of so many gods and so
formidable a list of religious festivals required the services of a
large body of carefully trained priests. The office of priest was one
which had undergone considerable evolution in Mexico, at least as far
as the immigrant tribes were concerned. At first the priest was also
the temporal leader; his principal duty was the care of the image of
the tribal god, which he carried during the wanderings of the tribe;
and since it was the god who directed those wanderings, and the priest
was the sole interpreter of his wishes, it came about that the priest
was also the director of the tribal policy. But once the tribe became
settled, there was a tendency for the priest to become less and less
a man of action, and to concentrate his energies on the elaboration
of ritual and the study of astronomy. At the same time there was no
sharp division between the temporal and religious authority; the
king exercised many priestly functions, and the priesthood possessed
enormous influence in national affairs. Priests even engaged in war,
and there was a special series of _insignia_ worn in fight by
those who had distinguished themselves in battle by the capture of one
or more prisoners. In Mexico itself at the head of the hierarchy were
two chief priests, each of whom bore the title of Quetzalcoatl (since
the god of that name was regarded as the prototype of all religious
orders), and who were distinguished by the names of Totec Tlamacazqui
and Tlaloc Tlamacazqui. The first was the priest of Uitzilopochtli,
the second of Tlaloc; they were equal in status, and both were
selected from the upper grade of religious officers in virtue of their
wisdom, piety and general good character, irrespective of their birth.
Subordinate to them was a minister called Mexicatl Teohuatzin, whom
Sahagun terms a “patriarch,” and who acted as general overseer of
ritual and of the priestly college called Calmecac. He was assisted
by two other functionaries, the Uitznauac Teohuatzin and the Tepan
Teohuatzin, the latter of whom shared his responsibilities as an
educational officer. Beneath these dignitaries were ranked an upper
grade of priests, called Tlanamacac, and a lower grade, Tlamacazqui;
and finally the novices, Tlamacazton. The priests of the upper grade
included a number of functionaries with special titles, who were
devoted to the services of particular deities, or to the discharge
of definite functions, as was the Ome Tochtzin, or overseer of the
religious singers, who provided the latter with wine according to
the following peculiar practice. After the singing, the Ome Tochtzin
produced 303 canes, one only of which was bored throughout its length;
the singers drew one each, and he who was lucky enough to hit upon the
pierced cane had the sole privilege of drinking octli on that day.
It is impossible to enter into details as regards these priests with
special functions, and the interested reader may be referred to the
work of Sahagun. The Mexican priesthood exercised very little control
over the religious life of the subject cities beyond exacting the
tribute necessary for the maintenance of the temples and sacrifices,
and insisting on expiatory sacrifices in cases of breach of discipline
(as in the case of the Totonac of Cempoala for having received the
Spaniards). Subject to this very loose supervision, each city was
permitted to exercise its own particular form of worship, and, as has
been shown, the Aztec were always ready to adopt the worship of the
gods of their neighbours. The ceremonial garb of priests in general
consisted of black body-paint, sometimes with designs in ochre, and
a black mantle; their hair was never cut, and the lobes of their
ears were invariably torn in shreds owing to constant practice of
the penitential rite of blood-letting. The black-robed priests with
their long locks matted with blood and their torn ears made a great
impression upon Bernal Diaz when he first met them in Cempoala. The
sacrificial priest constituted an exception in so far as his garment
was red, but his five assistants, the Chalmeca, wore black, and were
distinguished by a headband ornamented with paper discs.

The Tarascan priests differed in several essentials from those of the
Aztec. Since the office was hereditary they formed a caste, their heads
were carefully shaved, and their principal _insignia_ were a pair
of golden tweezers, used for epilation, and a calabash containing
tobacco, employed to produce a state of ecstasy during which they were
supposed to hold communion with the gods. Among the Totonac were two
high-priests consecrated to Cinteotl, who were regarded with especial
veneration; they were widowers, over sixty years of age, wore garments
of jackal-skins, ate no fish, and their functions were the delivery of
oracles, and the preparation of manuscripts.

In Tehuacan there was an especially holy order of priests who spent
four years at a time in perpetual prayer (by relays) and observed a
continual fast, abstaining from meat, fish, fruit, honey and pepper,
and taking but one meal a day. They were supposed to commune directly
with the gods, and were held in especial estimation by Montecuzoma.
But perhaps the most generally revered priest in Mexico was the priest
of Quetzalcoatl at Cholula, who was regarded as the direct successor
of the god, and who lived a life of particular austerity. Among the
Mixtec the high-priest wore a short coat embroidered with mythological
figures, and over this a garment described as a “surplice,” while his
head was crowned with feathers interwoven with small figures of the
gods. But one of the holiest priests was the high-priest of the sacred
Zapotec city of Mitla, who was kept in retirement, for it was feared
that death would seize any of the ordinary folk who might set eyes upon
him. He was regarded as an inspired prophet and was supposed to hold
converse with the gods.

The functions of the Mexican priesthood were manifold; apart from the
general care of the temples and the maintenance of the holy fires, the
priests were employed in sacrifice, divination, teaching, astronomy
and the preparation of manuscripts. The ceremonial burning of incense
at appointed hours absorbed much of their time, for to the sun alone
this offering was made four times during the day and three times during
the night. They lived in communities, under the strict supervision
of their superiors and colleagues; small breaches of discipline were
punished by extra performance of the penitential rite, by pricking
with aloe-spines, or by midnight offerings of incense upon a mountain;
more serious offences by beating, especially at the Etzalqualiztli
festival, or by death. The provision of wood for the temple fires was
a most important duty; in Mexico it was usually undertaken by the
novices, but in Michoacan it was nominally the duty of the king, though
in fact the high-priest, as his representative, saw to the matter. The
education of would-be priests was a matter of great moment, and the
institution at which this was carried out, the Calmecac, deserves a
word of description. Parents wishing to dedicate a son to the service
of the gods invited the officers in charge of that establishment to a
banquet during which they communicated their desires. The child was
then taken to the Calmecac and offered to the image of Quetzalcoatl,
the patron of the institution, and his ears were pierced. If too young
to be entered as a novice forthwith, he was for the time restored to
his parents, but his necklace was left with the god, since it was
believed that his soul was mysteriously attached to this ornament. At
the age of seven or eight the child definitely took up his residence
at the Calmecac, where his duties at first consisted in sweeping the
building and preparing the black paint used by the priests from the
soot of a species of pine. Later on he assisted in the collection of
aloe-spines used for blood-letting, and later still in the gathering
of firewood and preparation of sun-dried bricks for building (adobes).
All the time he was receiving instruction in the ceremonial chants
and in ritual, and learning the practice of austerities by rising
at midnight to offer incense or to take a ceremonial bath, or by
joining in the ceremonial fasts on appointed days. The elder novices
occasionally made pilgrimages at night to a neighbouring mountain; they
set out alone and nude, carrying a censer, a bag of incense, a torch,
a conch-shell trumpet, and a number of aloe-spines. The latter were
left at the furthest point of their journey wrapped in a ball of hay.
The Tlamacazqui lived with the novices at the Calmecac, all messed and
slept together, and were subject to the strictest discipline. A special
duty of the Tlamacazqui was the sounding of conch-shells and drums
at stated hours of the day and night. A portion of the Calmecac was
reserved for girls, also dedicated by their parents to the service of
the gods. They were under the charge of elderly unmarried women, and
assisted in the sweeping of the temples, the tending of the fires, the
preparation of food, and the manufacture of garments and ornaments for
the idols. They were compelled to live in strict chastity, but their
service was not necessarily life-long. Any girl when she attained a
marriageable age might leave the establishment with the permission of
her superiors, which was easily obtained by means of a present. In
fact, many girls entered the service of religion in the hope that their
devotion to the gods might be rewarded with a good husband.

An institution similar to the Calmecac existed among the Mixtec at
Achiutla.

Other institutions for the religious instruction of the young of both
sexes existed in Mexico, attached to various temples. The mode of life
was much the same as in the Calmecac, but the discipline was not so
severe.

As said before, one of the principal functions of the priesthood was
the exercise of the art of divination, and the principal instrument
was the tonalamatl. The priests of Tlazolteotl were supposed to be
especially expert in the use of the “book of days”; the horoscopes of
new-born children were invariably cast, and a favourable day selected
for the baptismal ceremony (as described below, p. 160), in accordance
with the various influences attached to the day of its birth. Constant
recourse was had to the interpreters of the tonalamatl in almost every
emergency, and practically no enterprise of importance was undertaken
except upon a propitious day. But there were numerous other methods
of divination, and several grades of magical practitioners. Grains of
maize or red beans were commonly employed to discover the issue of
a sickness. The goddess Tozi was the patroness of the professional
magicians who used this means, though the casting of the grains was
usually performed in the presence of a figure of Quetzalcoatl, the
arch-patron of magic. Twenty grains were usually cast upon a cloth; if
they fell forming a hollow circle, typifying a grave, it was believed
that the sick person would die; but if so that a straight line could be
drawn leaving ten on each side, the patient would recover. Or again, if
they fell scattered, a fatal termination to the illness was expected;
but if in a heap, health would be restored. At Tlaxcala it was a fatal
sign if one grain stood up on end. Grain was also used in divination by
the Mixtec, who sowed seed on the nemontemi days, and from its success
or failure calculated the prospects of the year’s crop. Another method
of prognosticating the chances of a patient consisted in winding a
string into a knot; if it could be pulled loose, the patient would
recover, otherwise his chances were small. Or again, a sick child
would be held over a vessel of water, and his reflection carefully
observed; if the image was dim there was small prospect of recovery.
The last method of divination was employed when the sickness was
supposed to be due to absence of the child’s _tonalli_ (which may
be translated “soul” or “luck”), and constitutes another instance of
the belief, so common throughout the world, that the incorporeal nature
of man is closely connected with his reflection or shadow. Snakes were
also used in divination, especially to discover a stolen object; the
suspected persons were seated in a circle, and the magician placed a
basket containing a snake in the middle. The basket was uncovered,
and it was believed that if the culprit were present the snake would
indicate the fact by crawling to him. Scrying in a mirror or bowl
of water was another method of divination widely employed in Mexico
proper, and was found among the Tarascans also. At Tlaxcala a peculiar
custom was observed when war was declared in order to estimate the
chances of ultimate success. Two sacred arrows were carefully kept
in this town, which were supposed to have been brought by the first
immigrants from Tulan. These were hurled in the direction of the foe
by two specially chosen warriors, and then recovered at all costs.
If an enemy was wounded by one the omens were regarded as especially
favourable. At Mexico the Naualli was a magical priest of a high order;
he was celibate, had been trained from youth in weather-wisdom and
spent much of his time in fasting and purification. He was credited
with special powers, such as the assumption at will of animal form,
and levitation; he acted as the general guardian of the city against
sorcerers, and gave warning of approaching famine or pestilence. The
belief in powers such as these became extraordinarily widespread after
the conquest, and resulted in the formation of a regular cult, the
members of which were called Nagual. The Nagualists were supposed
to have animal familiars, whose shape they could assume, and to hold
regular “witches’ sabbaths.” Many natives confessed to such practices,
and the Spaniards experienced great difficulty in stamping out the
cult, which had as its avowed object the elimination of Christianity,
and penetrated far into Central America. The information available
concerning this extremely interesting recrudescence of paganism can be
found in a small book by Brinton entitled “Nagualism.”

Besides the magical priests already mentioned, there existed a class
of professional conjurers, who performed various tricks, often for
hire. One would have a number of puppets in a pouch which came out and
danced, apparently uninspired by human agency, while another would
roast maize on a simple cloth without fire. The Huaxtec were supposed
to be particularly expert at such tricks, and among their feats Sahagun
mentions the production from space of a spring with fishes, the burning
and restoration of a hut, or the dismemberment and resurrection of the
conjurer himself. The last proceeding recalls certain of the feats
performed by the members of the ritual societies of the west coast of
North America during the winter ceremonials. The Ocuiltec of the Toluca
valley also possessed a great reputation as magicians. Various forms of
domestic divination were practised, such as the springing of octli upon
the hearth-fire, auguries being taken from the spluttering. But before
saying a word about the popular belief in omens, it will be as well
to treat very shortly the subject of sorcery. Individuals born on the
days 3. cipactli and 1. eecatl were supposed to be predisposed to the
practice of the black art, and days with the number nine, especially 9.
itzcuintli and 9. malinalli (but also 4. eecatl), were believed to be
especially favourable for their evil practices. They could transform
themselves into animal shape, influence the hearts of women, inflict
wasting diseases upon their enemies (as implied in one of their names,
“heart-eaters”), and bring misfortune. These arts they were ready to
place at the disposal of those who were prepared to pay for their
services, and they often combined their trade with that of professional
housebreaker. For this purpose their most powerful charm was the arm of
a woman who had died in childbirth; by its means they could cast sleep
upon the inmates of the house which they desired to rob, or at any rate
deprive them of the faculty of speech and movement. This belief bears
a strange resemblance to that once held in this country concerning
the magical properties attaching to the hand of an executed criminal.
They could however be kept at a distance by placing a stone knife in a
bowl of water on the threshold, or thistles in the windows. A bolder
method of counteracting the machinations of a sorcerer was forcibly
to snatch a few hairs from his head. It was believed that if he could
not recover them he was destined to die the same night, unless indeed
he could steal or borrow something from the house of his assailant.
Practitioners of the black art were punished by the Tarascans by
blinding.

Various portents were drawn from the animal world; the cries of beasts
of prey at night were supposed to forebode disaster to those who heard
them, and the voices of certain birds were believed equally unlucky.
The owl, so closely associated with Mictlantecutli, was especially
regarded as the harbinger of ill-fortune and death, and if one of these
birds perched upon the house of a sick man his demise was considered
certain. It was held unlucky to encounter a skunk or a weasel, and the
entry into the house of a rabbit or a troop of ants foreboded bad luck.
If a certain kind of spider was found in the house, the owner traced a
cross upon the ground, at the centre of which he placed the insect.
If it went towards the north, the direction of the underworld, it was
regarded as a sign of death for the observer, any other direction
foretelling misfortune of minor importance.

Besides these superstitions there were a whole host of popular beliefs,
of which only a few can be given here. Many of these were connected
with food; it was customary to blow upon maize before putting it in the
cooking-pot, to “give it courage,” and it was believed that if a person
neglected to pick up maize-grains lying on the ground they called out
to heaven to punish the omission. If two brothers were drinking, and
the younger drank first, it was thought that the elder would cease
to grow; and it was also believed that the growth of a child was
stopped by stepping over it when seated or lying down, but that the
effect could be averted by stepping back again. Young girls were not
allowed to eat standing, for it was believed that they would fail to
get husbands, and children were prevented from licking the grind-stone
for fear they would lose their teeth. When a child lost one of its
first teeth, the father or mother placed the tooth in a mouse-hole, a
proceeding which was supposed to ensure the growth of the second tooth;
and all nail-parings were thrown into the water in the hope that the
auitzotl, a mythical water-animal which was believed to eat them, would
make the nails grow. Sneezing was thought to be a sign that evil was
being spoken of the sneezer, and there was a peculiar belief that the
perfume of the flowers which were carried at banquets and in ceremonial
dances might only be inhaled from the edges of the bouquet, since the
centre belonged to the god Tezcatlipoca.

Magic played a very important part in the treatment of sickness,
and many diseases were supposed to be sent by the gods, either in a
malignant spirit, or as a punishment for some breach of ritual, such as
violation of a public fast. The Ciuapipiltin, the souls of women dying
in childbirth, were in particular supposed to be disease-bringers; they
were thought to haunt cross-roads on particular calendrical dates,
and to select children principally as their prey. People falling sick
on the date 1. ozomatli were generally given up by their doctors as
incurable victims of these malignant goddesses. Tezcatlipoca was also
regarded as a giver of disease in general, though in his case sickness
was a punishment for some fault. Other deities were supposed to preside
over special maladies, such as Xipe over disorders of the skin and
eyes, and Amimitl over coughs and dysentery. Individuals suffering from
the former complaints were believed to obtain relief by wearing the
skin of a sacrificial victim during the Tlacaxipeualiztli festival,
while the shrine of Amimitl at Cuitlauac was sought by victims of
the latter well on into Christian times. Ixtlilton presided over the
diseases of children, and in the courtyard of his temple were jars
of holy water used as medicine. The mountain-gods were believed to
send gout and rheumatism, and sufferers made vows to erect statues to
them and to the rain- and water-deities. Another medical divinity was
Tzapotlatenan, a deified woman who was revered as the discoverer of
the medicinal value of turpentine, while Teteoinnan was the general
patroness of doctors and midwives. Certain disorders were supposed to
be contracted from the natural world, e.g. by smelling or sitting on
certain flowers, while others were attributed to the machinations of
sorcerers. The treatment of patients offers two aspects, one of which
is purely magical, the other scientific. The Mexicans had a very good
knowledge of the properties of certain plants, and used them with much
success, both by external and internal application. In surgery they
could set bones, and Sahagun states that a badly cut nose was sewed
up with a hair, and a mixture of honey and salt applied. But no doubt
it was the magical aspect of medical treatment which counted most in
popular estimation. The medical priest would often apply suction to
the seat of pain, and then produce triumphantly from his mouth some
small object, such as an obsidian knife, which he pretended to have
extracted from the patient’s body. Amulets were frequently worn to
banish maladies, especially in the case of children, and many ointments
contained ingredients the effect of which was purely imaginary,
though the massage which accompanied their application had no doubt
a beneficial effect. One such medicament consisted of certain herbs,
including tobacco, pounded up with the bodies of various insects, and
this was also applied to the body as a protection against poisonous
snakes and other wild animals. The idea that sickness could be removed
by transferring it to another person was found in Mexico as in many
other parts of the world; in cases of fever the image of a dog would be
made of maize dough, and placed on an aloe-leaf in a pathway, and it
was believed that the first passer-by would remove the malady in his
heel-bones. A remedy which was of almost universal application, and
which was of real value, was the steam-bath. The patient was introduced
into a small brick-built chamber which had a furnace constructed at one
side. Between the furnace and the chamber was a slab of the volcanic
stone called _tezontli_, upon which water was poured to produce
steam. This building was called temazcalli in Mexico, but the treatment
is not peculiar to this area, being found elsewhere in America also.
According to Burgoa, among the Zapotec, persons who felt themselves
incurably sick would ask to be shut up in a chamber in the holy city
of Mitla reserved for the bodies of sacrificial victims and captains
killed in war. Here they were left to perish, secure in the knowledge
that their lot in the other world would be far superior to that in this.

To the Mexicans, as to many primitive peoples, death was not an
altogether abhorrent idea, being little more than an incident in the
continuity between this life and the next. But the manner of death
was more important, since it had a direct effect upon the fate of the
soul. The most enviable lot was that of the warriors who died either
in battle or in sacrifice; they were supposed to depart to the eastern
paradise of the sun, where, assembled on a great plain, they greeted
his rising by beating upon their shields, and escorted him on his
journey to the zenith. Thence they descended to the earth in the form
of humming-birds and other birds of bright plumage, and spent their
time among the flowers. Women dying in war or childbirth were equally
fortunate; as the counterpart of the warriors they went to the western
paradise of the sun, and bore him in a litter of bright feathers from
the zenith to the horizon, when they descended to earth in the form of
moths.

Those who were drowned, struck by lightning, or who perished by certain
diseases such as dropsy or leprosy, found a home in the terrestrial
paradise Tlalocan, the home of the god Tlaloc, where food-plants and
flowers flourished in miraculous fertility and summer was perpetual.
Those who died of other diseases or old age were obliged to embark
upon a difficult journey to Mictlan, the underworld, where the god
Mictlantecutli held sway. During this they had to pass between two
clashing mountains, to run the gauntlet of a great snake and a huge
lizard, to traverse eight deserts and eight hills, and to encounter
a wind full of stone knives. Finally, but not until the end of four
years, the soul reached the great river of Hades, which must be crossed
by swimming. For this the aid of a red dog was necessary, and dogs
of this colour were reared in the house and killed at funerals. An
interesting parallel to this belief is that current in parts of Peru,
that the souls of the dead were escorted to the other world by black
dogs, numbers of which were bred for this particular purpose. Though
living in the underworld, the souls of the dead were not deprived
of the light of the sun, since it was supposed to pass through the
infernal regions during the night on its journey back to the east.
The souls of infants dying still unstained by sin were believed to be
received in a special paradise by Tonacatecutli, where they spent their
time flitting from flower to flower in the form of humming-birds.

  [Illustration: FIG. 14.--A. Mummy of a warrior
  prepared for burial.

  (_Magliabecchiano MS., Florence_)]

  B. Mummy supported in the jaws of the earth-monster.

  (_Fejérváry-Mayer MS., Liverpool_)]

The question of the obsequies of the dead next arises, and we find two
methods of disposal practised in Mexico, cremation and inhumation. The
first of these appears to be the more characteristic of the hunting
tribes, though the account of Sahagun would seem to show that the
Chichimec originally practised the latter. This people were said to
be extremely long-lived, and protracted ill-health was regarded as so
uncanny that if a malady lasted over four or five days, the patient
was killed. The Tarascans certainly employed cremation; in the case
of the king, the body was laid out by the principal chiefs, who were
summoned during his illness, and carried in state by night to a temple,
where it was burned. A number of slaves accompanied the procession,
playing on tortoise-carapaces and rattles formed of a serrated bone
along which a stick was rubbed; these slaves were killed while the
pyre was burning, and were buried separately behind the temple. The
ashes of the king were made into a mummy-pack with a false head and
mask, which was buried seated in a large urn at the foot of the temple
steps facing eastward. The grave was roofed with wooden slabs, and
earth was heaped upon the top. Those killed in war were also burnt with
their bows before the temple, and their ashes buried in urns. Though
the wilder Chichimec, as stated above, appear to have simply buried
their dead, yet the early Chichimec kings in the valley of Mexico,
Xolotl, Nopaltzin and Quinatzin, are said to have been burnt and their
ashes deposited in urns in caves. At Teotihuacan, a site where the
Toltec culture flourished for a considerable period, unburned burials
are found, and it is probable, from other evidence, that cremation is
not typical of this civilization. The Acolhua practised cremation and
buried the ashes. The Aztec practised both forms of disposal of the
dead, but cremation, which, according to the early commentator on the
MS. known as Vaticanus A, they learnt from the Otomi, was the more
common. The deceased was made up into a mummy-pack with quantities of
paper, which was supposed to enable him to pass through the various
dangers to be encountered on his journey to the underworld, and decked
with appropriate ornaments (Fig. 14, _a_). Water was sprinkled
over his head, and a supply for his journey provided in a small vessel;
his red dog (shown in the illustration) was killed, and dog and master
were burnt together with various articles of personal property which
might be wanted in the other world. In many cases this privilege was
allowed to slaves destined for sacrifice, and they were permitted to
burn their small effects before they mounted the sacrificial stone. The
ashes were collected and placed in a vase or stone coffer, together
with a small jewel (the lip-plug of the deceased) to serve as a
“heart,” and buried. Offerings were made on the grave after twenty
days’ interval, and again after eighty days. These were repeated on
the annual feast of the dead for four years, after which the soul was
supposed to have completed its journey. The grave, at any rate in the
case of individuals of importance, was a vault lined with stone and
lime. The obsequies of the king followed the same lines, but were more
elaborate, and certain of his personal slaves and wives were killed to
accompany him. Motolinia states that in the case of men of high rank,
all the clothing which they had worn in life was buried with them. Both
the “Anonymous Conqueror” and Francisco de Bologna speak of bodies
being placed in the vault seated on a chair, and it is possible that
the ashes were occasionally made up into a mummy-pack as among the
Tarascans. However, simple inhumation was certainly practised by the
Aztec, though it was usually reserved for those whose manner of death
entitled them to a place in the terrestrial paradise Tlalocan. In the
case of a merchant dying while away from home on a trading expedition,
a figure was made by his relations at home and burnt with due ceremony.
If he had been killed by a hostile people, the cremation took place
in a temple-court, but if he had fallen a victim to disease, in front
of his house. Merchants of the Pochteca guild of Tlaltelolco received
special treatment; the body was swathed in paper, the face decorated
with the red and black paint of the gladiatorial sacrifice, ornaments,
including the lip-plug, were added, and the pack was attached to a
carrying-frame and exposed on a mountain-top. As stated before, the
souls of women dying in childbirth were deified under the name of
Ciuapipiltin, and their bodies were accorded special treatment. The
corpse, clad in its best garments, was borne by the husband to the
courtyard of the temple dedicated to the Ciuapipiltin, where it was
buried. On the way it was escorted by a retinue of midwives armed with
swords, and the husband and his friends kept watch over the grave for
four nights. These precautions were necessary to prevent young warriors
or sorcerers from seizing the body in order to obtain the left arm, or
middle finger of the left hand and the hair of the deceased. It was
believed that the finger and hair, if carried in the warrior’s shield,
would render the possessor invincible, while the hand was a powerful
charm used by robbers to cast sleep upon the inmates of a house, as
described on p. 98.

  [Illustration: FIG. 15.--Carved stone slab from
  Tlacolula, Oaxaca. (_After Seler_)]

When we come to consider the Mixtec and Zapotec, we find inhumation
the rule, indeed the Zapotec abhorred cremation, considering it
destructive of the soul. Nor was the method always simple inhumation,
but secondary burial. The body was placed in the ground with feet to
the east, and the bones were collected subsequently and placed in a
vase which was deposited in a stone vault in a mound, the doorway being
closed with a sculptured slab (Fig. 15). Both peoples also employed
caves to some extent as receptacles of the dead. Simple inhumation
in caves seems to have been more common among the Mixtec than the
Zapotec, and Burgoa writes of cave burials at Chalcatongo, supposed to
be the gate of paradise, where the dead were laid out dressed in rich
garments, numbers of small idols in gold, stone and wood being placed
in niches in the cave-walls. The same author tells of the Zapotec kings
being deposited at Mitla, in a chamber in one of the temples, clad in
gorgeous ornaments and holding shield and spear. It is possible that
primary burial was reserved for those of high rank.

  [Illustration: FIG. 16.--Carved stone slab from
  Placeres del Oro, Guerrero.]

An extremely interesting burial has been found at a place called
Placeres del Oro, in the valley of the Rio del Oro, a southern
tributary of the Rio de las Balsas. The chief interest of the remains
here found lies in the very peculiar art of the sculptured slabs
between which the bones were deposited (Fig. 16). The walls of the
grave, which was situated at the foot of a mound, were of clay hardened
by fire, and of the bones themselves it is said “there is good reason
to suspect that at least partial cremation of the body took place at
the time this burial was made.” This is a most important point, and
ought to be definitely settled by careful inspection of the bones. The
site is on the debatable land between Nahua, Tarascan and Zapotec,
and there are reasons, which will be given later, why I think it most
probable, failing definite evidence to the contrary, that the body had
not been burnt.

The fine stone coffer from the Huaxtec country shown on Pl. X, 2; p.
108, is almost certainly a coffin; and in the Totonac country both
cist-burial in mounds and, occasionally, well-burial are found. Traces
of cremation appear to be exceptional, and confined to hill-sites
inland, where they are perhaps indicative of Nahua influence.

  [Illustration:

  _PLATE X_


  HUAXTEC

    1. STONE FIGURE; PANUCO RIVER
    2.   „   CHEST;    „      „]

  [Illustration: MAYA

  3. POTTERY CENSER; BRITISH HONDURAS

  (Scale: 1, ⅒th; 2, ⅛th; 3, ⅕th)]

To speak broadly, it would appear that cremation was typical of the
invading hunter-tribes, inhumation of the early sedentary peoples of
the valley of Mexico. If this is so, the interment of individuals whose
souls were supposed to be destined for the paradise of Tlaloc is easily
explained, since that god appears to have been the deity principally
worshipped by the agriculturists of the valley, and it is only natural
that the form of burial characteristic of his early worshippers should
be retained in such cases.




                CHAPTER V--MEXICO: SOCIAL SYSTEM, WAR,
                           TRADE AND JUSTICE


It is difficult to say with certainty what was the social organization
of the wandering tribes which, one after the other, found their way
into the Mexican valley, but from indications we may gather that
there were two centres of authority. No doubt the principal of these
was religious; most of the tribes are mentioned as being under the
guidance of their god, and it may be inferred that the priest possessed
tremendous influence in directing the tribal policy. If the priest
were a fighting-man also, he probably became the sole leader, and it
is not unlikely that this was often the case. The fighting-priest was
no rarity in Mexico, and in later times there was a special set of
_insignia_ for priests who distinguished themselves in battle. But
normally, it may be concluded, the tribe was led in fight by the best
and most experienced warrior, whose authority was probably exercised
only during military operations. As amongst practically all nomadic
peoples, the heads of families probably constituted a tribal council.
The Toltec, upon the ruins of whose civilization the ruder Nahua tribes
established themselves, were admittedly a people of higher culture than
the immigrants; and they were living a settled life under the rule of
“kings” in whom the priestly aspect predominated. As has been seen
above, the Toltec themselves contained an immigrant Nahua element,
which presumably had imposed itself upon the prior inhabitants, but,
when the later-comers arrived, material prosperity had diminished their
warlike propensities, and they were known as a pre-eminently peaceful
people. Probably two facts had combined to bring about this result,
first that the valley was not at this early period so thickly populated
as to render collision between the different cities inevitable; and
second that war was not yet, as it was destined to become, the handmaid
of religion. It would seem that the moral effect, upon each wave of
rude invaders, of the more cultured, settled tribes whom they were
destined to conquer, was enormous. Settlement, increased prosperity,
expansion and conquest demanded some form of administration more
elaborate than that which a general, a high-priest, and a council of
elders could provide. The evolution of a complicated ritual based
upon astronomical calculation provided the priesthood with too much
work of a highly specialized character to leave it time to undertake
temporal rule, especially as that rule now involved the superintendence
of an elaborate military system. The result was that the general was
replaced by a “king,” and, owing to the moral ascendancy which each
earlier body of settlers exercised over its successors the first ruler
selected either was himself a descendant of some previous ruling
house, or received as consort a daughter of such and held his office
in virtue of that alliance. So we find that when the Aztec were at
Coatlichan, before Tenochtitlan was founded, they elected as leader
(he does not seem to have been counted among the “kings”) Uitziliuitl,
whose father was an Aztec of no particular rank, but whose mother was
a daughter of the ruler of Tzompanco: while Acamapitzin, the first
“king” of Tenochtitlan, was, by his mother, grandson of Coxcoxtli,
ruler of Colhuacan, and might therefore lay claim to Toltec descent;
also Quaquapitzauac, first king of Tlaltelolco, was son of the Tepanec
ruler of Azcapotzalco. Moreover it was Toltec descent which really
counted most, as may be seen in the fact that the Mexican “kings” were
installed as the representatives of Quetzalcoatl. The importance of
women as the channel by which rank was transmitted is obvious from
the genealogy of the Mexican sovereigns. As a rule brother succeeded
brother, and in any case it was only the sons of ladies of rank who
were elected to the throne. Though, however, the priesthood thus became
confined to the exercise of its own complicated profession, it never
lost its influence upon temporal affairs. Naturally the degree to which
that influence could be exercised depended to some extent upon the
personal character of the king, but it was always a power behind the
throne, and when the king himself had been trained as a priest, as was
the case with the last Montecuzoma, it had few limits, as the history
of the conquest shows. The association of the god Quetzalcoatl with the
kingly office invested the ruler with a semi-divine character, and the
subordination of war to religion gave the priesthood tremendous power
in the direction of military policy. The power of the king, apart from
his “divine right,” was based upon his offices as commander-in-chief
and supreme judge, the military aspect of his position being emphasized
by the fact that, from the time of Chimalpopoca, only those of the
ruling family who had held the position of general were considered as
candidates for the throne. In Michoacan however, though here too the
king was the chief judge, it was the religious aspect of his office
which predominated. The idol of the ruling class was in his especial
care, and one of his most important functions was the, at least
nominal, provision of sufficient fuel for the sacrificial fires. For
the rest, he was supported by a hierarchy of military and religious
officers similar to, but less elaborate than, that of the ruler of
Mexico.

At the time of the Spanish conquest the Mexican rulers maintained
an elaborate court ceremonial and their appointments were truly
magnificent. Diaz describes how the lord of Tezcoco came to meet the
Spaniards in a litter richly worked in green feathers, with many silver
borderings and rich stones set in bosses of gold. Later, Montecuzoma
arrived in a similar vehicle, and after alighting advanced supported by
four high chiefs “beneath a marvellously rich canopy of green-coloured
feathers with much gold and silver embroidery, and with pearls and
chalchiuites suspended from a sort of bordering which was wonderful to
look at.... He was shod with sandals ... the soles were of gold and the
upper part adorned with precious stones.” Cloths were spread before
him to tread upon, and all his suite kept their eyes lowered except
the four who supported him, who were his nephews. In his palace, his
antechamber was kept by a large body-guard, and even the most important
chieftains, when they came to visit him, exchanged their rich mantles
for garments of poor material and entered his presence barefoot. The
magnificence of his service, state apartments and general entourage,
his aviaries and collection of wild beasts, have often been described,
and by none better than by Prescott, so that it is hardly necessary to
enter into detail on this subject. Two quotations will suffice, both
from eyewitnesses, one relating to the practice of smoking, the other
to the dimensions of the palace. After his meal, which was served on
Cholulan pottery, “there were also placed on the table three tubes,
much painted and gilded, which held _liquidambar_ mixed with
certain herbs which they call _tabaco_; and when he had finished
eating, after they had danced before him and sung and the tables were
removed, he inhaled the smoke from one of these tubes, but he took very
little of it, and with that he fell asleep.”

Of the palace, the “Anonymous Conqueror” writes, “Several times I
entered the residence of the king, simply to see it; each time I walked
about there until I was tired, nevertheless I have never seen the whole
of it.” The various ornaments and ceremonial dresses of the king have
been described at length by Seler, and consisted chiefly of mantles
decorated with embroidery and feathers, feather back-devices, lip-plugs
and necklaces of particular patterns, and the like, many of them being
divine _insignia_ or costumes adopted from other tribes by right
of conquest. The list is too formidable to be included here, but two
are worthy of mention. One ornament worn by royalty and high officials
at festivals consisted of a band twined round the hair, to each end of
which a large bunch of feathers was attached; this is shown in Fig.
17, _a_, where it is worn by the Tlacochcalcatl. Diaz mentions an
ornament of particular interest in the words “Montecuzoma took from his
arm and wrist the sign and seal of Uitzilopochtli, which was



only done when he gave an important and weighty command which was to
be carried out at once.” Unfortunately nothing more is known of this
interesting bracelet. The most distinguishing sign of royalty was a
diadem of turquoise mosaic, rising to a peak in the front, rather after
the fashion of a mitre. This was known as the xiuhuitzolli, and a
plainer pattern was worn by the highest rank of judges.

  [Illustration: FIG. 17.--A. The Tlacochcalcatl in
  festival dress.]

  B. Warrior with insignia denoting that he has taken five
  prisoners.

  (_Mendoza MS., Oxford_)]

At the time of the conquest there were several independent states
in the neighbourhood of Mexico, of which the most important were
Michoacan, Quauhtitlan, Tlaxcala, Uexotzinco, Cholula and Meztitlan;
the sovereigns of which held positions very similar to those
of Mexico, though their courts were of course considerably less
magnificent. The two other states of the Mexican confederacy, Tezcoco
and Tlacopan, were similarly administered, and the court of the former
was only less brilliant than that of Tenochtitlan. The Tlaxcalan state
is often erroneously mentioned as a republic, but it was in fact a
confederation of four cities, built, as the population expanded, in the
following order: Tepeticpac, Ocotelolco, Tizatlan and Quiauitztlan.
Coyoacan, Xochimilco and Chalco were always more or less in a
state of revolt against Mexican authority, and must be regarded as
quasi-independent; at any rate they possessed rulers of their own.

When the Mexican throne fell vacant, the nobles and principal officials
of the kingdom appointed four electors, usually of royal blood, to
select the sovereign from the members of the ruling family. As stated
before, in normal cases the choice fell upon a brother of the late
king, or on a nephew belonging to an elder branch. The kings of Tezcoco
and Tlacopan also acted as electors, but probably only in name.

The election usually took place on the day 1. itzcuintli, and
the candidate was conducted in silent procession, clad only in a
waist-cloth, to the temple of Uitzilopochtli, where he was clothed in
a robe with a design of skulls and other _insignia_, and offered
incense to the god. The offering was repeated at other shrines, namely
those of the earth-goddess, Xipe, and Tezcatlipoca, and again at the
edge of the lake (probably to Tlaloc), and the king, after receiving
the homage of his subordinates, retired to an apartment in the temple
where he fasted for four days. At the end of this period he was
escorted back to the palace, and a great feast was held. At Tezcoco
and Tlacopan the rulers were elected by the nobles on similar lines,
and the kings-elect were invested by the king of Mexico. In Michoacan
the proceedings were similar, save that the king designated his
heir during his lifetime and at once admitted him to a share in the
government. At Tlaxcala, Uexotzinco and Cholula, the heir-presumptive
was overwhelmed with insults to prove his patience and then taken to a
temple where he spent one, or even two, years observing a strict fast
and performing penance. Finally a day was fixed for the installation
ceremony, which must be an uneven number of days from the date of his
birth, and his time of trial was over. The final ceremony included the
boring of the candidate’s nose for the reception of a gold ornament,
the badge of his rank. A similar period of penance was endured by the
heirs of Mixtec lords before their admission to office.

An interesting variety of government is presented by the constitution
of the Matlatzinca district in the days before its conquest
by Axayacatl. Here there were three chiefs, the Tlatauan, the
Tlacochcalcatl and the Tlacatecutli, ranking in that order. At the
death of the first, the second succeeded to his office, and was himself
succeeded by the third. The vacant post of Tlacatecutli was then filled
up by selection of the most capable son or brother of the deceased, or,
if he had no relations, of a prominent noble. Each of these officers
was supported by the tribute furnished by particular local clans,
similar to the Mexican calpulli described below.

Each ruler confirmed the succession of his sub-chiefs, and they of
their inferiors, but in these cases it was usually a son who inherited,
failing sons, a brother, or failing brothers, a nephew. But a very
large proportion of the office-holders were merely appointed for life,
and their posts at their death became vacant and at the disposal of the
king, though in actual fact a relation was often appointed as successor
in such cases.

  [Illustration: FIG. 18.--Various articles of tribute.

    _a._ Bale of cacao.
    _b._ Stone lip-plug.
    _c._ Jadeite beads.
    _d._ Mosaic ear-ornament.
    _e._ Pink shell.
    _f._ Amber.
    _g._ Salt.
    _h._ Cochineal.
    _k._ Burden-frame.
    _l._ Chest of maize.
    _m._ Ceremonial dress.
    _n._ Feathers.
    _o._ Basket of copal.
    _p._ Shield.
    _q._ Jar of honey.
    _r._ Bale of cotton.
    _s._ Textile with designs.

  (_Mendoza MS., Oxford_)]

When the Mexicans first adopted settled life, they were brought face to
face with a question which they had not before been forced to consider,
the land question. In the city itself land was extremely restricted,
and the growing importance of agriculture led to an elaborate system
of intensive cultivation of the territory around. Land was seized by
right of conquest, and assigned by the conqueror to his followers.
Thus we read of the Chichimec leader Xolotl giving cities to immigrant
chiefs to whom he married his daughters, or whose support he wished
to conciliate. In this way certain territories passed into the hands
of certain great lords, who apportioned it amongst their dependents,
and reclaimed it as they wished. But there was another class of
landowner, probably having its origin in later times, consisting of men
to whom the ruler made grants of land in return for eminent services,
especially in war; such land was neither alienable nor hereditary, but
lapsed to the crown at the death of the holder. Of great interest was
the land held in common by the local clans, called calpulli, composed
of the descendants of the different families of the invaders, and of
the tribes who attached themselves to the latter in early days. The
calpulli, which were twenty in number, were the offshoots of the four
original tribal divisions, each of which formed a “ward” of the city
at its foundation. These wards, named Moyotlan, Teopan, Aztacalco
and Cuepopan, survived as administrative divisions in later times,
though their functions as holders of land in common were taken over
by their sub-divisions, the calpulli. They were even maintained in
Spanish times, becoming transformed into the “barrios” respectively
of San Juan, San Pablo, San Sebastian and Santa Maria la Redonda.
Land belonging to a calpulli was inalienable, though under certain
circumstances it could be let to another calpulli; it was vested in
the calpulli-chiefs, whose office was nominally elective, but who
in fact were usually chosen from one family. Members of a calpulli
obtained land sufficient for their needs from their chief, and held it
as long as they continued to keep it under cultivation, failing which
their tenure lapsed. Land so apportioned was in practice hereditary,
but only on these terms, and the man who changed his residence lost
his holding. The clan-chiefs possessed considerable power, since they
represented the calpulli in all external business, being in fact the
descendants of the heads of families who formed the old tribal council,
and regulated the inner life of the clan. A land system somewhat
similar to that of the Mexican calpulli existed among the Mixtec in so
far as land appears to have been hereditary in families but could not
pass outside the local group. Below the members of the calpulli ranked
certain freemen who farmed the lands of the lords on payment of a
rental (in kind), and, finally, a class of serfs who were bound to the
soil and probably represented the remnants of the early agricultural
population. The Mexican social system therefore comprised a landed
aristocracy who paid no definite taxes, but owed service to the king;
associated with them was a military nobility who held lands at the
king’s goodwill, and whose tenants paid royal taxes. Lower in rank
were the calpulli freemen, who paid taxes in common; still lower, the
tax-paying rent-holders, and finally the serfs, who paid taxes only to
their feudal lords. In addition to these there was the official class,
their sons and descendants, who, ranking as warriors and noble, paid
no definite taxes, but contributed their personal services and formed
the suite of the ruler. The office-holders were known by the generic
name of Tecutli, and the positions which they occupied were essentially
military in origin; four of them were placed as overseers of the four
districts into which the city was divided for administrative purposes,
and acted as representatives of the Tlacatecutli, or ruler. Besides
these there were the judicial officials, treasurers, and a whole
host of overseers, of whom the lowest in rank, as in Peru, exercised
supervision over a few families only. The travelling merchants
constituted a peculiar and privileged class, and will be considered
later when the subject of trade is discussed. The expansion of the
power of Mexico brought many other cities under its influence, and
these were obliged to furnish tribute in kind, and were also liable to
military service. In important cities a governor, Petlacalcatl, was
placed, with a tax-gatherer, Calpixque, under him; in less important
districts a governor or a Calpixque resided in the principal city,
and the tribute was collected in the surrounding towns by subordinate
officials. Apart from a general supervision there was very little
interference with the tributary cities; the original rulers were
rarely displaced, but continued to govern according to the local
laws, and, with the exception that certain lands were often reserved
for the use of the Mexican crown, the property of the conquered was
respected. The rather loose nature of the suzerainty exercised by
Mexico over its dependents made revolt a frequent occurrence, but this
was hardly regarded as a drawback, owing to the ceremonial nature
of war and its function in providing victims for sacrifice. Tribute
was generally paid by a town or district in common, and consisted of
local produce and manufactures (Fig. 18). Produce-tribute, which was
generally levied at harvest-time, was furnished by the common lands,
and stored in magazines in the principal cities. Maize and other grain
was contributed in large chests (Fig. 18, _l_), and cotton (_r_),
cacao (_a_) and pepper in bales. Of manufactured articles, textiles
(_s_) and ceremonial costumes (_m_) were the most common, but the
tribute-lists show a great variety. Many of the town-names in these
lists cannot now be located, but their geographical position can be
roughly assumed from the nature of their contributions. From Soconusco
came lip-plugs, cacao, feathers and hides, from Oaxaca province, gold
and cochineal (Fig. 18, _h_), from the Tlalhuica, paper and pottery.
Other forms of tribute were honey (_q_), lime, wood, salt (_g_), copal
(_o_), sea-shells (_e_), amber (_f_), rubber, live eagles, copper axes,
chalchiuitl beads (_c_), turquoise (_d_), swords, shields (_p_), and
canes filled with perfumes for smoking. Tax-gatherers were received
with great ceremony and respect, and the arrival of these officers at
the town of Quiauiztlan, in Vera Cruz, is described by Diaz. A special
apartment decked with flowers was prepared for them, together with
food and chocolate; they arrived dressed in richly embroidered cloaks
and loin-cloths, their hair bound up on their heads, each carrying
a crooked staff and a bouquet of flowers which he smelled from time
to time. The Totonac it is true complained to the Spaniards of the
harshness of Mexican rule, probably referring rather to the Aztec
demands for sacrificial victims. Tribute on the whole seems to have
been fairly assessed, and was remitted in years of famine.

While the first step in the evolution of the Mexican constitution
is marked by the election of Acamapitzin as king, in place of the
old tribal council under a president, yet it was the overthrow of
Azcapotzalco which gave the hegemony of the valley to Mexico, and
compelled it to provide for the administration of dependent cities.
A number of officials bearing titles similar to those at home were
sent to Coyoacan, and definite arrangements were made with the allied
states of Texcoco and Tlacopan in accordance with which the rulers of
these cities became, at least nominally, electors of the Mexican kings,
and placed the direction of their military policy in the hands of the
latter. It was only in military matters that the two confederate states
deferred to Mexico; they had their own sovereigns, their own laws and
provinces, and we are told that Tezcoco exercised dominion over no
less than fifteen of the last-named in the direction of the Atlantic
coast. Each ruler confirmed the election of their sub-chiefs, and they
of their dependents. Of the booty won by the united armies, two-fifths
was taken by Mexico, two-fifths by Tezcoco, and one-fifth by the small
state of Tlacopan.

The final stage in the development of the Mexican constitution was
marked by the conquest of Tlaltelolco by Axayacatl, and the appointment
of a governor for this suburb in place of an independent sovereign.
The military basis of Mexican hegemony coloured the whole of its
domestic economy, and resulted in the formation and rise of a military
aristocracy in the hands of which lay practically all the executive
offices in the city.

As commander-in-chief the king was of course the head of the
fighting-men, and in some cases actually took the field himself,
immediately after his installation, for instance, in order to procure
the necessary sacrificial victims. He was supported by two principal
officers, the Tlacatecatl and Tlacochcalcatl (Fig. 17, _a_; p.
113), of whom the latter was a purely military functionary, while the
former exercised certain administrative functions also. The same titles
were borne by the chief subordinates of each of these respectively. A
propitious date was awaited for the proclamation of a campaign, the
day 1. itzcuintli being considered especially favourable; the hostile
country was explored by spies, called Tequihua, who brought back to the
king various maps and other documents containing information likely
to prove of use during the operations. War was formally declared by
sending weapons, down and chalk, the _insignia_ of sacrifice,
to the enemy, and the expedition set forth, on a lucky day such as
1. coatl, in a prescribed order. First marched the priests with the
idols of the gods, next the Mexican veterans, followed by the less
experienced; following them came the forces of Tezcoco and Tlacopan,
and finally the fighting-men of allied provinces. When the forces
were drawn up, new fire was made by the priests, and the attack
commenced. The actual combat does not seem to have been attended by
great slaughter, since the chief object of each individual fighter
was not to kill his foe, but to make him prisoner. The first captives
were immediately handed over to the priests and sacrificed on the
spot, while those taken subsequently were carried back to the city.
The ceremonial nature of war is clearly shown in the fact that rewards
were conferred upon those who succeeded in capturing prisoners, in
proportion to the number of their captives, but no account was taken
of those who merely slew their opponents. To this fact the Spanish
conquerors owed a large measure of their success, since the foe were
chiefly anxious to take them alive, and rather avoided inflicting
mortal injuries than otherwise. Diaz comments upon the rapidity with
which the Tlaxcalans removed their wounded from the scene of action,
but without understanding that the reason was to prevent them from
falling alive into the hands of the enemy. The Tarascan customs
were similar; in time of war the priests offered herbs and tobacco
at midnight, selecting a date when the position of the stars was
favourable, and denounced by name the leaders of the opposing troops.
The herbs, together with eagle-down and bloodstained arrows, were taken
by spies and deposited within the enemy’s territory, a proceeding which
was intended as a declaration of war, but also possessed the magical
significance of devoting the foe to death. A Mexican army in the field
was an extremely gallant sight; the leaders and most distinguished
fighters were brilliant in ornaments of gold and the feathers of
tropical birds and embroidered tunics. Military _insignia_ existed
in great variety, each individual wore every decoration to which he
was entitled, and the regimental and tribal standards of elaborate
feather-work made a brave show. The Mexican standards consisted of an
eagle and a jaguar; that of Tlaxcala was a white heron with outspread
wings, and the four Tlaxcalan provinces had each their own badges,
Tepeticpac, a wolf with arrows; Ocotelolco, a green bird on a rock;
Tizatlan, a heron on a rock; and Quiauiztlan, a green canopy. Standards
were fastened securely to the backs of certain officers, and the
capture of one of them, or the fall of a general, was invariably the
signal for a retreat. Diaz describes the Tlaxcalan levies as “brilliant
with great devices, each regiment by itself with its banners unfurled,
and the white bird, like an eagle, with its wings outstretched, which
is their badge.”

Children, as a preparation for military service, were entered in one
of the schools called Telpochcalli, which were under the protection
of Tezcatlipoca, and there underwent a rigorous training, in part
religious, which was not, however, so severe as that of the Calmecac.
On first entering they were charged with the duty of sweeping the
building and attending to the fires, later of fetching wood and
engaging in various constructional works. During this period they took
their meals in their own houses, but returned to the Telpochcalli
to sleep; their amusements consisted in attending the dances, in
the building called Cuicacalco, which took place between sunset and
midnight. The sons of the higher officials who intended to embrace the
military profession received the superior education of the Calmecac,
and accompanied experienced warriors to battle in the capacity of
shield-bearers. As soon as the young man was of an age to go to
war, the whole of his hopes centred upon the taking of a prisoner,
so that the lock of hair which he wore at the back of his neck as a
sign of his noviciate might be removed. If he performed the feat with
the aid of several of his companions, all were permitted to wear a
side-lock instead, but if single-handed he received at the hands of
the king the privilege of wearing certain body-paint and embroidered
mantles of particular designs. The capture of two, three, four or more
prisoners was also rewarded with special _insignia_ (Fig. 17,
_b_; p. 113), with promotion in rank, and the gift of privileges
including the right to wear a lip-plug of a particular pattern and
to sit on a particular seat. A distinction was made according to the
nationality of the prisoners captured; one or more Huaxtec were of
comparatively small account, but the taking of even a single warrior
of Atlixco or Uexotzinco was regarded as a great feat and received a
corresponding reward. Two “orders” existed, which were conferred upon
the most prominent warriors, the “eagle” and the “ocelot”; those who
obtained one of these coveted distinctions were allowed to wear dresses
representing the animal from which their order took its name. Other
dresses and back-devices, each conferring a definite status, existed in
numbers, and constituted an important item in the tribute sent by the
dependent cities. If after a few fights the would-be warrior had still
failed to secure a prisoner, he was disgraced, and usually retired into
private life rather than continue to wear the novice’s lock, but he was
for ever debarred from wearing garments of cotton or ornamenting his
clothes with embroidery. Proved warriors were permitted to wear their
hair in a lock on one side which they brushed so as to stand upright,
while those of higher rank wore the lock above the forehead encircled
by an ornamental band (see Pl. IX, 4 and 5).

The distinguishing weapon of the Aztec was the bow, and it was no
doubt the possession of this arm which contributed substantially to
their success in their fights with the early population of the valley.
Manuscripts relating the wanderings of the people before they reached
their final home show the Aztec, skin-clad and armed with the bow,
fighting with the valley-dweller clothed in cotton and armed with the
macquauitl, or wooden sword edged with obsidian. The Chichimec were
also wielders of the bow, as well as the Tarascans, but this weapon
was especially associated with Uitzilopochtli, who was supposed to
have given it to the Mexicans, saying “All that flies on high do the
Mexicans know how to hit with the arrow.” The bow was plain and of
no great dimensions; the arrows were headed with fish or mammal bone
or with flint or obsidian, and, to judge from the manuscripts, each
had two feathers attached with the flat sides against the shaft. The
macquauitl, a broad-bladed club along the edges of which were set
flakes of obsidian set in resin, was carried by the ordinary soldier,
and, wielded by an expert, was capable of decapitating a horse at
one blow; however, it soon lost its edge. The early Nahua and the
valley-dwellers seem to have employed the atlatl, or spear-thrower,
rather than the bow. This implement, which is found both in North and
South America, consists of a staff armed at the point with a hook,
which fits into the butt of the javelin; Mexican specimens are usually
provided with two rings of shell or other material near the handle
through which the fingers are passed (Pl. XVII, 1). This appliance
gives length to the arm, and enables the javelin to be hurled with
far greater force than by the hand alone. While Uitzilopochtli and
Camaxtli are usually shown with the bow, most of the other gods appear
with the atlatl, which is often richly ornamented with feathers. The
javelins were pointed as the arrows, or the ends were simply hardened
in the fire; some had two or more points, and were furnished with
a cord like a harpoon by means of which they could be retrieved;
these were especially feared by the Spaniards. The only mention of
poison is found in Burgoa who states that the Mixtec applied it to
their javelins. Spears were carried by those of higher rank, and were
furnished with stone heads or set with obsidian after the fashion of
a macquauitl. Long spears of this pattern, with a fathom of cutting
edge, were used by the Zapotec. Slings were also employed, especially
by the Matlatzinca, and though bows were found among the Olmec and
Huaxtec, they must have been of quite late introduction. Diaz mentions
“three blow-guns with their bags and pellet-moulds,” which he saw in
the treasury of Axayacatl, the blow-guns themselves being incrusted
with mosaic work, but these weapons were probably used only in
hunting. Quilted cotton corslets, laced up the back and forming one
with the breeches, were worn as defensive armour, and, according to
one of the conquerors, could only be penetrated by a good arquebus.
Nobles wore cuirasses of gold plates under their feather mantles. The
Mexican bucklers were small and circular, usually made of wicker with
a covering of feather-work (Fig. 18, _p_; p. 118) and sometimes
gold plates; tortoise carapaces were also used, and among the Zapotec
larger shields covering the whole body. Helmets were of wood, with
hide and feather ornaments, and often represented the head of some
animal, jaguar or snake, the jaws of which framed the face of the
warrior (as Fig. 18, _m_). The defensive armour of the Mixtec
was of hide. Clubs with heads of stone or wood were employed by the
Tarascans. Defensive works were not very elaborate, though we read of
palisades and walls; but the cities were usually built in some position
which afforded natural protection. Thus Tenochtitlan and Xochimilco
were situated on small islands in lakes, while the settlements of the
Tlalhuica were amidst almost inaccessible barrancas. Of the various
nationalities the Aztec were undoubtedly the most warlike, followed
at no great distance by the peoples of Tlaxcala and Uexotzinco. Of
the peoples of Oaxaca the Mixtec, though inferior to the Aztec, were
superior to the Zapotec.

In connection with the military expansion of Mexico, mention must be
made of the guild of travelling merchants, or Pochteca. The Pochteca
were not peculiar to Tenochtitlan; similar guilds were found in
Azcapotzalco, Uitzilopochco and Quauhtitlan, but those of Tlaltelolco
were by far the most famous. Membership of the guild was a valued
privilege, since the merchants stood high in the royal favour; only the
sons of merchants could become merchants except by permission of the
chiefs. Like the other calpulli, the Pochteca were under the direction
of headmen, who represented the guild in external business, but they
were privileged in so far as they were exempt from agricultural labour
and from the ordinary judicial system, delinquents being judged by
their own headmen. They worshipped special gods, chief of whom was the
deity Yacatecutli, and joined in private ceremonies of a kind, as far
as can be judged, far more elaborate than those of the other guilds. To
some extent it is true that the importance of the guild grew with the
expansion of Mexican power, but it would be almost equally true to say
that Mexican power grew with the extension of the merchants’ sphere
of operations. They acted in fact as the pioneers of Mexican political
influence, they penetrated fearlessly into hostile countries either
openly and armed, or disguised, and for this purpose learned the speech
of foreign nations. They acted as spies of the king, and in one case
a body of Pochteca of Tlaltelolco were besieged in a town in Anauac
Ayotlan, or the district around Tehuantepec, and, after four years,
succeeded unaided in reducing the province to submission. For this deed
they received special privileges and _insignia_ from the king
Auitzotl, including the right to wear lip-plugs of gold, while their
captains bore military titles. At the time of the Spanish conquest
these merchants made extended journeys far into Chiapas and Tabasco,
and penetrated even to Guatemala. The gradual extension of their sphere
of operations can be seen in the wares which they imported from time
to time, and as this has a bearing upon Mexican history it is worth
mention. In the reign of Quaquapitzauac, first king of Tlaltelolco,
the imports were brilliant feathers from the low countries; under
his successor, quetzal-feathers, turquoise, chalchiuitl and cotton
textiles were added; in the next reign, lip-plugs of precious stones,
gold, skins, and a greater variety of feathers were introduced; and
under Moquiuix, the last king, cacao became an article of merchandise.
This information is from Sahagun, who, in a later passage, states that
precious stones were collected especially in southern Vera Cruz and
Tabasco, and quetzal-plumes from the region around the present San
Cristobal in Chiapas.

The Pochteca were careful to set out on their expeditions on a
favourable day, such as 1. coatl, and before starting they made
offerings to their god and the Earth; they also cut their hair and
washed their heads, since custom forbade them to do either while on
a journey. Their relations were also obliged to remain with head
and face unwashed, except at intervals of eighty days, during their
absence. They started out in a large body, merchants from various towns
combining to form a caravan, as far as Tochtepec. There they divided,
some going to Anauac Ayotlan, others to Anauac Xicalanco (southern Vera
Cruz and Tabasco). When they returned, often after years of absence,
they awaited a favourable day to enter their city, such as 1. calli,
or 7. calli, when their home-coming was celebrated by a banquet and
various religious ceremonies. Each merchant carried a staff, which was
regarded as the image of the god Yacatecutli, and received offerings
in his name. When on the march, the company of merchants at night tied
their staves together, and offered incense before them, at the same
time making blood-offerings from their ears and tongues.

The extraordinary facility with which nomadic hunting tribes adopt a
trading profession has many parallels in Africa, where the interests of
the wandering merchant are similarly guarded. Just as violence against
one of the Pochteca inevitably resulted in a punitive expedition, so in
times past the murder of a Bushongo trader by a Basongo Meno village
would result in the extermination of the latter, and, at the present
day, the death of a Badjok merchant would be similarly avenged by his
compatriots. Mexican trade was for the most part carried on by means
of direct exchange, and the result provides many difficulties to the
archæologist. Once a town became famous for any kind of manufacture,
the work of its artisans became spread far and wide, so that the
discovery of objects of a particular style in a certain locality
can by no means be taken necessarily to indicate that that style is
characteristic of the site. Even pottery, which provides such valuable
evidence in other parts, is not exempt from suspicion, since the ware
of Cholula constituted an important article of export from that town.
Certain articles formed a rough-and-ready currency in commerce, such
as textiles and maize; cacao beans also were used as a kind of “small
change,” and copper axe-blades were employed in certain localities,
such as Oaxaca. More than one of the contemporary historians mention
quills containing gold-dust as being utilized for the same purpose. The
great market in Tlaltelolco moved the wonder of the conquerors; it is
described as being three times as large as that of Salamanca, and one
estimate places the daily attendance at twenty or twenty-five thousand
persons. One of the conquerors gives the following picture of it. “On
one side are the people who sell gold; near them are they who trade in
jewels mounted in gold in the forms of birds and animals. On another
side beads and mirrors are sold, on another, feathers and plumes of
all colours for working designs on garments, and to wear in war or at
festivals. Further on, stone is worked to make razors and swords, a
remarkable thing which passes our understanding; of it they manufacture
swords and roundels. In other places they sell cloth and men’s dresses
of different designs; beyond, dresses for women, and in another part
footgear. A section is reserved for the sale of prepared hides of
deer and other animals; elsewhere are baskets made of hair, such as
all Indian women use. Cotton, grain which forms their food, bread of
all kinds, pastry, fowls, and eggs are sold in different sections;
and hard by they sell hares, rabbits, deer, quails, geese and ducks.
Elsewhere wines of all sorts are for sale, vegetables, pepper, roots,
medicinal plants, which are very numerous in this country, fruits of
all kinds, wood for building, lime and stone. In fact, each object has
its appointed place. Beside this great market-place there are in other
quarters other markets also where provisions may be bought.” Special
magistrates held courts in the market-places to settle disputes on the
spot, and there were market officials similar to our inspectors of
weights and measures. Falsification of the latter was visited with
severe punishment.

The judicial system at Mexico was elaborate and efficient; justice
was administered by a hierarchy of special officials, at the head
of whom stood the Ciuacoatl or Chief Justice. This office, however,
appears to have had its military aspect, in so far as the holder
acted as commander of the Mexican contingent when the confederate
forces went out to battle. The Tlacatecatl also acted as a high
judicial functionary. The judges were selected by the king and highest
officials from past students at the Calmecac, men of middle age full of
experience and of unimpeachable integrity, who were “neither drunkards,
nor amenable to bribes, nor liable to be influenced by favouritism nor
passion.” They received state maintenance, and if convicted of taking
bribes or of delivering unjust sentences were punished with death. Each
of the subject provinces maintained two judges at the three confederate
towns, to whom the rulers assigned lands and service, and the ordinary
courts opened in the morning, as soon as the judges had taken their
seats at the mat-covered tribunal. Their midday meals were brought to
them in court, and, after a short rest, they remained sitting until
two hours before sunset. The high court sat in an apartment in the
palace called Tlacxitlan, and dealt principally with high affairs of
state and matters affecting the higher ranks, though it also pronounced
sentences upon the cases sent up by the lower court. The latter,
composed of representatives of the calpulli, also sat in the palace,
in a room called Teccalli, and dealt with the affairs of the general
public, sending its decisions to the Tlacxitlan for pronouncement of
sentence. Important and difficult cases were reserved for a special
court of thirteen judges headed by the ruler, which sat every eighty
days. In the provinces there were a number of local courts of limited
jurisdiction, from which cases of any importance were sent to the
capital for trial, and there existed besides in the capitals a number
of small courts, such as the market court, which dealt summarily with
small offences, but from which appeal could be made to the higher
courts. In the case of offenders of high rank the case was sometimes
tried in the home of the criminal who, if found guilty, was executed
there in private. Important tributary towns, as stated above, were
often allowed considerable independence as regards judicial matters,
and the rulers were allowed to judge their own people according to
the local laws. Below the judges were a number of minor officials,
apparitors and the like, as well as a military town-watch which
kept order at night. Penalties varied in proportion to the gravity
of the offence, from fines, payable in textiles, and flogging, to
mutilation and death by the rod, the strangling-cord or by stoning.
At Tezcoco a celebrated code, invented by the king Nezahualcoyotl,
was in force, and the Mexican and Tacuban codes were based on this
to a large extent; moreover, cases were often sent to Tezcoco for
trial. Condemned criminals were shut up in cages to await execution,
which usually took place upon some day considered appropriate, such
as 1. quiauitl or 4. eecatl. Theft was punished in various ways; in
unimportant cases the thief was compelled to make restitution, in
cases more grave he became the slave of the complainant; if he had
stolen gold or jewels, he was sacrificed to Xipe at the goldsmiths’
festival. Stealing corn from the fields was punished with death, and
though this sentence may seem severe, the crime was the less excusable
because corn was planted along the roadsides for the use of wayfarers.
The death penalty was also inflicted for wrongful assumption of the
_insignia_ belonging to the highest offices, for murder, adultery
(by stoning), sorcery (by sacrifice), disobedience or desertion in war,
injury to a royal messenger, or shifting a landmark. The laws against
drunkenness were particularly strict; in the case of the young this
offence was often punished with death, the accused, if of low rank,
being publicly clubbed to death so that his fate might serve as an
example. Rank could not save a man, though it gave him the privilege
of being executed in private. Less aggravated cases were punished by
degradation in the case of a noble, accompanied by public hair-cutting
and the destruction of the culprit’s house. Only the elderly were
permitted the free use of octli, though men over thirty were allowed
a moderate supply at festivals and when engaged upon hard manual
labour. In other cases special permission had to be obtained from some
official superior before the intoxicating liquor could be drunk without
fear of punishment. These regulations, though severe, were extremely
salutary, a fact which is proved by the outburst of drunkenness which
took place after the conquest, when the old _régime_ was swept
away. Punishment was often inflicted upon a tributary town by demanding
victims for sacrifice, as in the case of Quiauiztlan in Vera Cruz, the
inhabitants of which were ordered to provide twenty men and women for
this fate because they had received the Spaniards. The Tarascan ruler,
at the time of the greatest development of the Michoacan peoples,
was assisted in government by two ministers analogous to the Mexican
Ciuacoatl and Tlacatecatl respectively. The judicial code was much
the same, though little definite is known concerning it save that the
death penalty was inflicted for the wrongful appropriation of land,
the head of the criminal being set up on the violated boundary. Among
the Chichimec, adultery was punished with death, each member of the
tribal group shooting four arrows at the guilty couple. The Mexicans
held slaves, or rather bondsmen, in some numbers, and the slave-class
consisted of criminals, prisoners of war, and individuals sold
into slavery. Persons in extreme poverty could pledge themselves or
their children, and we read that in the reign of Montecuzoma many of
the better-class families were reduced to such straits by a famine
lasting two years that they fell into slavery. By orders of the king
these unfortunates were sought out and ransomed by him at twice the
price paid for them. It is said that the sale of a slave required
two witnesses, and that slaves could not be sold without their own
permission, except those who wore heavy wooden collars as runaways
or insubordinate. A peculiar form of slavery existed, in accordance
with which an indigent family could bind itself to supply one or more
slaves perpetually to some lord, the individual in servitude being
changed every few years. If a slave-woman died as the result of an
intrigue with a free man, the latter became the slave of her master;
but if a child was born and both survived, it became the property of
the father and was free-born. Slaves were well treated on the whole,
though they were liable to be sacrificed. They were considered as under
the protection of Tezcatlipoca, and at one of his feasts were accorded
absolute licence as at the Roman Saturnalia.




           CHAPTER VI--MEXICO: CRAFTS, DRESS, AND DAILY LIFE


For most practical purposes the Mexicans at the date of the Spanish
conquest were living in an age of stone. It is true that they both
knew and worked two metals with great facility, namely, gold and
copper, especially the former; but gold is useless as a material from
which to make implements, and copper was not sufficiently plentiful
to be employed very freely. Both these metals were therefore utilized
principally in the manufacture of ornaments, though copper tools were
employed in wood-carving and a few minor arts.

  [Illustration: FIG. 19.--Stone and obsidian implements.

    1, 2. Obsidian scrapers.
    3–5.     „     flakes.
    6, 7.    „        „ perhaps for inlay.
       8. Chert knife-blade.
       9. Obsidian core, from which flakes have been struck.

  (_British Museum_)]

Hard stone from which adze- and axe-blades and chisels could
be manufactured occurred in quantities in Mexico, and various
volcanic rocks were quarried for the purpose of making implements.
Chalcedony and other flinty materials were used in the manufacture
of knife-blades, and the workmanship of these, especially of some
of the specimens from the Mixtec country, are surpassed only by the
finest examples of ripple-flaking from ancient Egypt (see Fig. 19,
8). Knife-blades of this form were usually thrust into a simple ball
of resin to form a handle, though for ceremonial use elaborately
carved wooden hafts covered with turquoise and shell mosaic (Pl.
XVIII, 1) were fitted to them. But the material which perhaps was of
the greatest use to the Mexicans was obsidian. From blocks of this
natural glass long flakes could be detached by pressure, each of which
came away from the core with a razor-edge. Such flakes were used as
knives without further preparation, or were inset along the borders
of wooden swords to form a cutting edge. The flaking-implement was a
pointed stick with a cross-piece at one end; the artisan rested the
point on a suitable spot on the obsidian block, which he held between
his feet, and applied the necessary pressure by leaning his chest
against the cross-piece. The nature of the long thin flakes which were
detached, and of the core from which they were struck, is shown in Fig.
19, 3–5 and 9. Broader flakes were worked up by secondary flaking to
form delicate arrow-heads and graceful spear-heads, while large slabs
were polished to form mirrors, the surface being carefully finished
by continuous rubbing with a handful of reeds. Masks were also made
from this material, and details such as teeth and eyes were inlaid
with shell and other substances. Stone axes (Fig. 20) were carefully
ground by rubbing on a block of hard-stone, probably with sand or
emery and water, the surface in the more highly-polished specimens
being finished with bamboo. The shapes show some variation, but the
implement usually tapers slightly towards the butt, which is rounded
off more or less abruptly; some specimens are long-oval in transverse
section, while others are quadrangular. They were hafted by being
simply thrust into a wooden handle, as shown in Fig. 4, _f_; p.
35. The finest specimens are made of some kind of jadeite, and are
often beautifully polished, especially those from the Mixtec country.
In the Tarascan country, and northward to La Quemada in Zacatecas, are
found types closely akin to those of Arizona and California, viz. heavy
axes, coarsely ground, with one or two grooves partially or entirely
encircling the butt (Fig. 20, 4, 7 and 8). These must have been
attached to the haft by thongs, or a stout twig must have been bent
round the implement and secured by a lashing below. Such forms as these
are not found in the Mexican valley or further south, until Ecuador is
reached, but are in reality characteristic of the northern portion of
the continent. In the same area are found peculiar blades in animal
form, as shown in Fig. 20, 5. Great masses of stone were handled with
considerable facility, and it is only necessary to call attention to
the objects shown in Pls. III and VI-VIII, as evidence of the skill of
the Mexico mason. The large coping-stone with a figure of a fire-snake
in high relief illustrated on Pl. V, 2, being an especially fine
specimen from a technical point of view.

  [Illustration: FIG. 20.--Stone axe-blades.

             1. Etla, Oaxaca.
       2, 3, 6. Valley of Mexico.
    4, 5, 7, 8. Michoacan (Tarascan.)

  (_British Museum_)]

To speak generally, Aztec sculpture often shows a slight stiffness in
style, due in part to its conventional nature, but many specimens exist
which exhibit considerable freedom of treatment, notably the figure
of Xochipilli on Pl. V, 1 (of which the characteristic crest rising
from the head-dress is unfortunately missing), and the magnificent
rattle-snake on Pl. XI, A. Characteristic of the stone art of Tulan
are caryatid figures (similar to Fig. 84, p. 348) and serpent columns,
both of which will be met again when we come to consider the art of
Yucatan; and related to the same culture are figures representing a
reclining god, probably one of the octli-gods, holding a vase. One
of these, of colossal proportions, has also been found in Yucatan.
This type of statue seems to have been copied in Aztec times, and
the specimen on Pl. VIII, 2, probably belongs to this later period.
Caryatid figures are also found in Tlaxcala. A particular class of
sculpture is constituted by the peculiar stone figures found in the
Panuco valley, of which a fine series may be seen in the British
Museum (Pl. X, 1). These are distinguished by the pointed head-dress
associated with the Huaxtec, sometimes combined with the jaws of a
monster, or a semicircular crest with engraved snake-design. Most
are otherwise nude, and all exhibit a somewhat crude and archaic
character. Belonging to the Totonac culture are certain enigmatical
stone objects, beautifully carved, of which the principal are the
so-called “yokes” and “paddle-shaped stones.” The shape of the former
is best seen from the illustration, Fig. 21; viewed from the side or
rounded end (_a_), the carving in nearly all cases represents a
monster or grotesque human being crouching upon the ground, while from
above (_b_), the rounded end represents the upper jaw of a gaping
mouth furnished with teeth. The use of these has been much disputed,
but I would suggest the following explanation as the simplest. The
attitude of the crouching figure shows that the normal position of
the object is flat upon the ground, as in Fig. 21, _a_, while
the fact that the yokes are found in graves suggests that they have
a funerary significance. It is possible that they were meant to
support the corpse in an upright position, and as such the crouching
figure typifies the earth-monster, while the gaping mouth represents
the jaws of the same creature open to receive the dead, just as the
earth-monster is shown in manuscripts supporting a mummy-pack in its
open maw (Fig. 14, _b_; p. 104). These carved yokes, many of which
suggest Mayan rather than Mexican art, seem to have been carried by
trade or otherwise over a large area, since examples have been found
in Tlaxcala, Tabasco, Guatemala and San Salvador. The paddle-shaped
stones often exhibit great skill in stone-carving, but at present no
explanation of their use is forthcoming. These again are Mayan in type
rather than Mexican.

  [Illustration: FIG. 21, A, B. Stone “Yoke”; Totonac district.

  (_British Museum_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 22.--Stone figurines; Mixtec.]

In working stone, stone tools were alone employed, copper being quite
unsuitable for the purpose. Of smaller works of art attention may be
called to the specimens shown in Pl. XI, 3 and 4, which are carved in
jadeite or some analogous material. The small seated figures in Fig.
22, and the carved plate in Pl. XI, 4, are particularly characteristic
of Oaxaca. Fine alabaster vases were manufactured, especially in the
Totonac country around Vera Cruz, the interiors being laboriously
drilled out by means of a tubular drill, probably of bone or bamboo, a
practice also followed by ancient Egyptian lapidaries. Small mirrors,
with a convex surface to reduce the image, were made from nodules
of pyrites, and beads and pendants of all descriptions manufactured
from jadeite and other translucent stones. Fine green jadeite, called
chalchiuitl, was highly prized, and its use was allowed only to persons
of high rank. Ornaments of this material were given by Montecuzoma
to Cortés for transmission to the Emperor, and Diaz quotes his words
as follows: “I will also give you some very valuable stones ...
chalchihuites ... not to be given to anyone else, but only to him,
your great Prince.” Bead necklaces of this stone formed an important
item of tribute from certain subject cities (Fig. 18, _c_; p.
118). In producing the smaller works of art from crystal, jadeite
and amethyst, flint, and sometimes copper, points were used for
engraving and drilling, emery was employed in rubbing down, and small
articles were set in wood for polishing. Heliotrope, being very hard,
was set in stone. The stone-workers of Xochimilco and Tenayocan
enjoyed a particularly high reputation. The most gorgeous works of
the lapidary’s art were the mosaics, of which two are shown on Pls.
=I= and =XVIII=, 1. In the first, fragments of turquoise
and jet are laid in a resinous matrix on a human skull; the eyes are
pyrites encircled with shell rings, and the nose is inlaid with plates
of pink shell (pink shells also formed an article of tribute, see Fig.
18, _e_; p. 118). Some of the teeth have been reset in their
wrong places. The knife-handle is similarly incrusted with turquoise,
malachite and shell. Masks of the gods, head-pieces and ornaments
were made in the same materials on wood foundations, and the masks of
Quetzalcoatl, Tlaloc and Tezcatlipoca were among the articles sent by
Cortés to the Emperor Charles. The Tarascans were especially famed as
mosaic workers, and the art extended right up into Arizona, though not
in such perfection. It is thought that the turquoise itself passed in
trade southwards from the deposits at Los Cerrillos in New Mexico. The
Toltec were reputed to have been particularly skilful lapidaries, and
to have possessed peculiar powers in the way of discovering deposits
of precious stones. For this purpose, so it was said, they would take
up their position on some elevated spot just before dawn, and at the
moment when the sun appeared above the horizon, would note any small
cloud of vapour rising from the earth, a manifestation which was
supposed to indicate where they might be found.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XI_

  MEXICO

  STONE RATTLE-SNAKE

  (Scale: ⅙th)]

  [Illustration:

    _British Museum_

  MAYA

    1. JADEITE RELIEF
    2.    „      „    FROM TIKAI.

  MEXICO

  3. JADEITE HEAD

  MIXTEC

  4. JADEITE RELIEF FROM OAXACA

  ZAPOTEC

  5. GOLD LIP-PENDANT FROM TEHUANTEPEC

  (Scale: 1–5, ⅔rds)]

Copper was used occasionally for axe- and adze-blades, and constituted
an article of tribute. Analysis has shown that it was hammered out,
and the edge hardened by this means alone. Some of the blades contain
a percentage of tin, but the presence of the latter metal may be
regarded as purely accidental. The forms are usually similar to
those of the stone implements, and they were hafted by lashing, with
wedges, to a handle, as shown in Fig. 27, _a_; p. 148. “Eared”
varieties however occur, though they are rare, and a peculiar T-shaped
type is found in some quantity, extending into Oaxaca and Guatemala.
Most of the last-named are so thin that it is difficult to see what
useful purpose they could have served, and it is probable that they
constituted a form of currency, though the suggestion has been made
that they were used as knives for cutting feathers in the preparation
of feather mosaic. Bells of copper are common throughout the whole
of Mexico, some in a peculiar technique which look as if they were
made of soldered wire, and animal forms in the same style have been
found in Tarascan territory. Close examination would seem to show that
these are really cast by the _cire perdue_ process, as described
below. Great difficulties however attend the casting of copper, and it
is possible that such articles contain a percentage of tin. Analyses
however are lacking, and it seems certain that the presence of tin must
be regarded as accidental, for though deposits of tin were found in
Guerrero by Cortés, yet the inhabitants had never deliberately mixed it
with copper until shown how to do so by the Spaniards. Of the mining of
copper, little is known, but ancient workings have been discovered at
Cerro del Aguilar in Guerrero. Abundant traces of fire are to be seen,
and no less than 140 stone wedges have been collected there. Probably
the process consisted in heating the blocks of ore, and driving the
wedges into the resultant cracks so as to split them up into more
manageable fragments. The Zapotec country was famed in old times for
its copper.

  [Illustration: FIG. 23.--Mexican artisans.

    A. Feather-worker.
    B. Goldsmith.
    C. Stone-bead maker.

  (_Mendoza MS., Oxford_)]

In the working of gold the Mexicans exhibited particular skill,
and though great quantities of the wrought metal were found by the
conquerors, yet a very small percentage of the enormous amount
exported since the conquest has found its way into museums. The
greatest treasure discovered at one time by Cortés was that amassed by
Axayacatl, father of Montecuzoma. Of this Diaz writes: “Cortés and some
of the captains went in first (into the treasury), and they saw such
a number of jewels and slabs and plates of gold and chalchihuites and
other great riches that they were quite carried away, and did not know
what to say about such wealth.... When I saw it I marvelled, and, as at
that time I was a youth, and had never seen such riches as those in my
life before, I took it for certain that there could not be another such
store of wealth in the whole world.” This treasure was subsequently
found to be of the value approximately of one and a half million
sterling. Another of the conquerors relates the finding of 480 oz. of
gold in one grave. But the accounts of the workmanship of the various
articles surpass even their number. We read of “a very rich necklace of
golden crabs, a marvellous piece of work”; of “two birds made of thread
and feather-work, having the quills of their wings and tails, their
feet, eyes and the ends of their beaks, of gold, standing upon two
reeds covered with gold, which are raised on balls of feather-work and
gold embroidery, one white and the other yellow, with seven tassels of
feather-work hanging from each of them”; and of a fish with alternate
scales of gold and silver. Unhappily no such works of art as the two
latter have survived. Grijalva describes the getting of gold by picking
out the grains from river-sand; the collector storing them in his mouth
and later melting them down on the spot in a pottery vessel, blowing up
the fire by means of tubes of reed, as in Fig. 23, _b_. Gold was
also washed from river-sand in small troughs, the water being poured
on from gourds. This method was employed both on the east coast and in
the Zapotec region, but regular mining was practised by the Zapotec and
Chinantec, and gold formed a very important article of tribute, both in
dust and plates. The goldsmiths of Azcapotzalco were the most famed in
the valley; and gold-workers in general were divided into two classes,
beaters and casters. In beating, stone hammers were used for the most
part, and the workmen were very skilful at overlaying with gold-foil
(the spear-thrower shown on Pl. XVII, 1, has been ornamented in this
way). Wooden beads overlaid with gold have been found in the Totonac
country. Casting was carried out as follows: pounded charcoal was mixed
with fine clay, and kneaded out into thin discs, on which the details
of the desired ornament were engraved with a copper tool. Wax was then
prepared by boiling, mixed with copal to give it firmness, and, after
clarifying by means of a filter, was rolled out on a polished stone and
applied in small strips to the details of the design. Pounded charcoal
in solution was added as a covering, and, over all, a coating of clay,
also mixed with charcoal. A rod of wax, coated with clay, was added,
to form a connection with the wax model within. The whole was baked,
the wax run out and the molten gold poured in. Finally the mould was
broken, and the casting rubbed with earth mixed with salt, to give it
a good colour, and then polished. Objects so prepared often have the
appearance of soldered wire, but, in such specimens as the ring shown
in Fig. 24, the reverse side plainly shows that the greater portion
has been cast solid. In the case of the gold ear- or lip-ornament
from Tehuantepec (Pl. XI, 5), some of the details appear to have been
soldered on after casting. We are told that the designs applied to
beaten gold by engraving were usually traced for the goldsmiths by the
feather-workers.

  [Illustration: Fig. 24. Gold finger-ring (_scale ²⁄₁_).]

  [Illustration: FIG. 25.--Feather-work mantle
  (_Berlin_). (_After Seler_)]

Of this feather-work (Fig. 25) very few specimens remain, but the
description of the methods employed in its manufacture have been
preserved in the nahuatl text of Sahagun and translated by Seler. Diaz
writes of fine fabrics covered with feather-work made by women, and
brought daily “from some towns of the province on the north coast near
Vera Cruz called Cotaxtla, close by San Juan de Ulua.” In the valley
the most renowned feather-workers were the inhabitants of the Amantlan
quarter of Mexico, who worshipped gods of their own, and prided
themselves on their descent from early immigrants into the valley from
the north. The implements used in the craft were a brush and colour-box
for sketching designs, a copper knife and wooden cutting-board, and
a bone spatula for attaching the feathers when cut into the required
shapes. In some cases the feathers were simply sewn to cloth, but the
more elaborate mosaics required a lengthier process. Cotton was applied
to a strip of maguey by means of paste, and a coating of paste was
painted over it; after drying, the cotton was peeled from the maguey
and pasted to a backing of bark-paper: the design was carefully drawn
upon it, and then cut out after the manner of a stencil, through which
the design was traced upon a sheet of maguey, backed with cotton, or
cotton backed with maguey. To the last a layer of the cheaper kind of
feathers of the requisite shapes and colours was applied by means of
the spatula, first the outlines in black, and then the body-colours and
details. The foundation was then detached and fastened to a board, and
the final layer, this time in precious feathers of similar colours,
was added. The stencil was used as a check throughout the whole of
the process. Every kind of feather ornament was made by these artists,
including the elaborate back-devices worn by different ranks of
warriors. For many of the latter cane frames were constructed, to which
the feathers, carefully marshalled, were attached by threads, layer
upon layer being added, each covering the bare quills of the last,
the final row consisting of down. In the earlier days obsidian knives
were used to cut the feathers, and in reality the art only became of
importance after the conquest of various coastal towns brought the
plumes of the more gorgeous birds to Mexico in great quantities as
tribute. Those workers engaged upon the feather ornaments and mantles
used to deck the figure and representatives of the god Uitzilopochtli,
lived in a special house, and many of the more important lords
maintained artists who worked especially for them.

  [Illustration: FIG. 26.--Pottery spindle-whorls
  (the top right-hand specimen is of bone), from the Island of
  Sacrificios.

  (_British Museum_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 27.

    A. Wood-carver.
    B. Woman weaving.

  (_Mendoza MS., Oxford_)]

The textile arts flourished throughout Mexico, though owing to
the unfavourable nature of the climate, specimens are practically
non-existent. Thread was spun by the women from nequen, the fibre of
the maguey or cotton, and the fur of rabbits was also utilized. Girls
learnt the art at a tender age, and the ornamented spindle-whorls,
usually of pottery, but sometimes of bone, are common in museums (Fig.
26). The spindle was made to revolve in a small pottery bowl, as is
shown in Fig. 29; p. 161, and the thread was woven on a loom of simple
construction. The warp was fastened to a convenient post, and kept taut
by means of a band passing round the back of the weaver, who beat down
the weft with a wooden “sword” (Fig. 27, _b_). The loom was in
fact almost certainly the same as that used right into modern times,
and it is probable that a number of heddles were employed for the more
elaborate designs. Cotton was of course grown in the hotter countries,
and both textiles and the raw material formed perhaps the most
important article of import into the valley. Strangely enough it is the
inhabitants of the cooler districts who bore the reputation of being
the most skilful weavers. Some idea of the designs which were employed
may be gathered from the manuscripts, but the patterns there figured
form only a very small proportion of the whole. Sahagun gives a long
list of names relating to particular types of mantle, unfortunately
without further description except in a very few cases. One of these
may be cited in illustration of their elaborate nature. “They also made
use of cloaks on which were figured beautiful and rich jars mounted on
three feet, and furnished with two ‘wings’ like those of butterflies
(octli-vases). The lower portion of the jar was rounded and coloured
red and black (the colours of the octli-gods), the wings were green
with a yellow border, and three small dots of the same colour on each.
The neck of this jar had the form of the _marquesota_ of a tunic,
crowned with four small rods embroidered in red and blue feathers.
These jar designs were scattered on a white field. This cloak had two
red stripes along its front border, passing over white bands grouped
two by two” (see the textile in Fig. 18, _s_; p. 118). Many of
the details in patterns such as the above were added in embroidery, at
which the Mexican women were equally expert. Good polychrome weaving
was performed by the Otomi in maguey fibre, and the Tarascan and
Huaxtec ranked high as textile artists. The Tarascan women were said
to prepare food for a couple of days before starting to weave, so that
they might not be disturbed at their task. Weaving and embroidery were
under the especial patronage of the goddess Xochiquetzal. Mat- and
basket-making was also an important industry, though of these arts also
specimens are lacking. However, the use of mat seats was a privilege
of rank, though perhaps less so than in the Maya region, and the
mat-makers paid reverence to a special patron-deity, Napatecutli, one
of the Tlaloque. The consideration of Mexican pottery will be deferred
until the architectural remains have been discussed.

  [Illustration: FIG. 28.--Designs from pottery
  stamps; Valley of Mexico.

  (_British Museum_)]

A certain amount of information concerning the dress and ornaments of
the Mexicans can be gleaned from the foregoing pages, and repetition
will be unnecessary. The ordinary dress for a man, worn by nearly all
the peoples mentioned in this book, was a girdle, maxtlatl, the ends
of which hung down before and behind, and a shoulder-cloak (e.g. Fig.
23; p. 143). The woman’s dress, equally universal, consisted of a
skirt and a tunic, usually without sleeves (e.g. Fig. 27, _b_;
p. 148). The original costume of the Aztec was of skins, but after
their settlement in the valley, textiles were adopted, first of nequen
fibre, later of maguey and cotton. The last-named material however
was reserved for the upper classes, the women of which added to their
attire by wearing additional tunics and skirts. Exceptions to the
above rule were constituted by the Tarascans, among whom the men,
as among the Huaxtec, wore no maxtlatl, and the Chichimec who wore
skins. Skin-clothing prevailed to some extent among the Tarascans
also, though they were good weavers, and in this district the young
wore shorter skirts than their elders. The following garments were
considered more or less characteristic of certain peoples; white cloaks
with figures of scorpions in blue of the Toltec; striped textiles of
the Otomi; duck-feather cloaks of the Tarascans; net cloaks of the
Totonac; white cotton mantles of the Zapotec, and polychrome textiles
especially representing interlaced eddies (as the shield in Fig. 18,
_p_; p. 118) of the Huaxtec. Body-paint was employed by all the
tribes, especially on ceremonial occasions; Mexican women were in the
habit of painting their faces yellow and impressing patterns in red
upon their cheeks with pottery stamps (Fig. 28). Figures of monkeys
and coxcoxtli-birds were especially favourite designs. The Tarascans
of Tzintzuntzan used black body-paint, like the priestly orders in
Mexico, and the Tlalhuica red. The question of tatu is more difficult
to settle, certainly this form of adornment was not common. Sahagun
states that in the month of Toxcatl the priests “with a stone knife
made scars on children of both sexes, on the breast, the stomach, the
middle of the arms and the wrists,” and also that the Otomi women
“made on their breasts and arms designs in a blue colour, by means of
small instruments which fixed the colour in the flesh.” The latter
statement at any rate seems to point to the practice of tatu. Sahagun
states that the Huaxtec and Totonac tatued, and the slab illustrated
in Fig. 11; p. 83, shows a man whose limbs are apparently ornamented
in this manner. Otomi women stained the teeth black, a practice found
also among the Huaxtec, while tooth-filing was found among the latter
people, the Tarascans and the Mixtec. Pottery heads showing the Maya
form of tooth-filing have been found in the Totonac area. The actual
inlaying of teeth seems to have been confined to those peoples of
definite Maya affinities, such as the Huaxtec, though teeth ornamented
in this fashion have been found in the Mixtec area, at Xoxo. Mexican
women of rank filed the teeth and painted them red. This practice seems
to have been borrowed from the Huaxtec, and tooth-mutilation as a whole
does not seem to have been a characteristic of the Nahua-speaking
peoples. Methods of dressing the hair show slight variations, though
the ordinary method was to cut it short on the forehead and temples,
and allow it to grow at the back. The Tarascans however for the most
part cropped it close all over, while the Chichimec did not cut it
at all, but wore it in plaits. Among the Otomi the child’s head was
cropped close, men and young girls cut the locks on the forehead, and
women after becoming mothers allowed it to grow all over the head and
dressed it on the top. Zapotec chiefs and warriors wore long hair
gathered at the back in a pigtail. In Mexico men of rank, being
warriors, cut the hair, and brushed it up on the right side (Pl. IX,
4), while chiefs cropped most of the head, leaving a long lock on the
forehead which they kept erect by means of a fillet (Pl. IX, 5). Of
Montecuzoma we read, “He did not wear his hair long, but so as just
to cover his ears.” In Mexico women of rank sometimes wore the hair
plaited and crossed on the forehead in two “horns,” but ordinarily
it was allowed to grow and was worn loose. Ear-ornaments were almost
universal, in the form of plugs of stone, gold and turquoise; while
lip-plugs were found among the Mexicans, Otomi and Totonac (see Fig.
18, _b_; p. 118). At Mexico the lips of children were pierced on
admission to the Calmecac, and the status of a man could be judged
by the quality of his lip-plug. Shell and obsidian marked the lower
ranks, while gold and gems were reserved for the higher orders of
nobility; most prized of all were those of chalchiuitl, or of crystal,
the latter being hollow and containing a blue feather. Nose-ornaments
were not so common, and were especially associated with the Huaxtec;
they are however frequently seen in the representations of Mexican
goddesses (especially those borrowed from the Huaxtec) and consisted
for the most part of gold plates, often in the form of a butterfly,
or of golden tubes. Of the tremendous variety of ornaments worn round
neck and arms and attached to the garments, it is impossible to write
in detail, but some idea of their variety may be gathered from the
following passage of Sahagun, describing the dance performed by men
and women of the warrior-class in the month Uei tecuilhuitl. “The
women were clad in rich and costly robes and skirts ornamented with
elaborate embroidery.... Of the robes ... some were white without
designs, and the upper opening of these was bordered with deep fringes
which covered the whole breast, and the fringes of the lower border
were equally deep. These women danced with their hair down, confined by
plaited bands which ran from forehead to neck. Their faces were without
ornament, smooth and clean. The men were equally richly clad; they wore
a cotton cloak of so wide a mesh that it might almost be called a net.
In the case of men who were distinguished by great valour and who had
the right to wear a plug in the lower lip, these cloaks were fringed
with small white shells ... those who were not so distinguished wore
black cloaks with (plain) fringes. All wore ear-plugs of mixed metals,
but those of the higher ranks were of copper with gold pendants, their
lip-plugs corresponding. In some cases these lip-plugs represented
lizards, in others, small dogs, or two small squares of metal. The
youngest who had already distinguished themselves in action wore in the
lower lip a large disc, containing four others arranged crosswise. The
youngest of all had a plain disc without ornament. All the ‘braves’
wore hide collars with pendants terminating in numbers of small white
shells ... and at the same time lip-plugs of oyster-shell in the form
of an eagle; while others who considered themselves of still greater
valour, bought small white spheres found in certain molluscs. Ordinary
folk decked themselves in a sort of chaplet, yellow in colour, made of
other marine products, and of small value. Among this class, those who
had captured prisoners in war bore an ornament of plumes on their heads
as an indication that they had taken a captive in battle. The captains
were distinguished by feather _insignia_ attached to their backs,
as a sign of valour.... There were some who carried on the left foot
the hooves of deer attached with strips of hide of the same animal.
All had their faces painted in various designs; some painted circles
on their cheeks and stripes on the forehead from temple to temple with
black pigment covered with iron pyrites, others prolonged the stripe to
the ears, and others again painted stripes from the base of the ear to
the mouth.” Feathers of course, whether applied to textiles or worn by
themselves, constituted an extremely important article of adornment,
and even the Otomi women wore them on their feet and legs during
dancing, a custom found also among the Toluca. Sandals of hide with
straps ornamented according to the rank of the wearer were in universal
use.

The Mexicans enjoyed considerable variety in food, and though famines
were not uncommon, yet the attention paid to agriculture in the
valley and the extensive trade-system made the supply plentiful under
normal circumstances. The Chichimec hunters lived on game, wild roots
and fruits, and honey, but most of the remaining tribes practised
cultivation, especially of maize, though the Otomi were said to have
been improvident in the use of the crop. To speak generally, maize
was the staple food, though free use was made of other grain, yams
and beans. From maize a large variety of “bread” was manufactured,
mostly in the form of thin cakes differing greatly in quality. The
grain was thrown into boiling water, into which a little lime had
been sprinkled, to remove the husk; when cool, it was washed, ground
on the grinding-stones, called metatl, and kneaded into dough which
was cooked in pots, or wrapped in leaves and steamed. Certain flowers
were often added to give it a flavour. Maize-meal was often boiled in
water, the liquor being strained and reboiled until it was reduced to a
kind of gruel, called atolli, which was consumed in large quantities.
Venison, rabbits, hares, quails, partridges, ducks, turkeys and geese,
provided the most common flesh-foods; the two latter birds were
domesticated and were bred almost as much for their feathers as for
their flesh, especially in Culiacan, Jalisco and Michoacan; eggs were
not eaten. The hairless Mexican dog was also bred as a food-animal
in some places, such as Jalisco. Meat was cooked wrapped in dough
or plainly roasted, and pepper was consumed in great quantities as
a condiment, just as in Peru. Fish too formed an important article
of diet, and the courier-system in the later days of the Empire was
so excellent that it could be brought fresh from the coast for the
use of the royal house. Certain marshflies which appear in veritable
clouds on the lake were pounded and made up into balls and boiled,
and their eggs were collected from the reeds and eaten as a kind of
caviare; frogs too were not despised, and the Otomi were credited
with eating snakes and rats. A peculiar food seen by the conquerors
consisted of “cakes made from a sort of ooze which they get out of the
great lake, which curdles, and from this they make a bread having a
flavour something like cheese.” Honey, both that of bees and that made
from the sap of the maguey, was used to sweeten atolli and in many
other ways, and salt was prepared by filtering water through certain
kinds of earth and evaporating the liquor. The constant hostilities
of the Tlaxcalans with the Mexicans had resulted in the almost total
destruction of the salt trade as far as the former were concerned;
in fact the inhabitants had practically lost the habit of taking it,
and some years elapsed after the conquest before it became common in
that district. It is said that neither salt nor pepper was used by
the Toluca and Matlatzinca. As regards beverages, two were of great
importance; the first of these was prepared from the cacao, imported
from the hotter regions near the coast, and was called chocolatl
(whence our own word chocolate). The nut was pounded and boiled in
water with a little maize-flour; the oil was skimmed off, and the
mixture strained and poured into another vessel so as to produce a
froth; sometimes honey and vanilla were added, and it was generally
taken after food with tortoise-shell spoons. The other national drink
was octli (often inaccurately termed pulque, an Argentine word for
the same beverage), prepared from the fermented sap of the maguey. The
heart of the plant was cut out (the day 1. tecpatl being considered
an appropriate date) and when the sap had collected it was drawn off
in long gourds by means of suction applied through a small hole at
the end, and stored in skins or calabashes. Fermentation was assisted
by the addition of a certain root. The legal restrictions placed upon
the use of this beverage in Mexico have already been mentioned. Other
fermented drinks were prepared from grain, and a certain mushroom was
employed as an intoxicant, especially at a feast organized by the guild
of merchants. The effects of the latter are described by Sahagun:
“Some sang, others wept because they were intoxicated; others remained
silent, seated in the hall as if absorbed in thought. Some thought
that they were dying, and sobbed in their hallucination, while others
imagined that they were being devoured by some savage beast. Others
again thought that they were capturing an enemy in fight, another that
he was rich, another that he possessed a large number of slaves. Some
thought that they were taken in adultery, and that their heads were
being crushed for this crime, others that they had been convicted of
theft and were being executed, and a thousand other illusions. When the
intoxication had passed, they entertained one another by relating their
hallucinations.” The discovery of the properties of this fungus seems
to have been made originally by the Chichimec, since its use was common
among this people. A kind of chewing-gum was prepared from resin or
bitumen, though its use, at any rate in public, was confined by custom
to unmarried girls. Allusion has already been made to the practice
of smoking; reeds were collected and after being carefully smoothed
were filled with pulverized charcoal mixed with tobacco and other
fragrant herbs. The exterior was often richly ornamented with paint
and gilding, in some cases in such a way that the design only appeared
under the influence of the heat produced by the act of smoking. Pottery
pipes are found in Mexico, though not in great numbers, and it is
uncertain to what extent they were used before the conquest. Pipes are
found more frequently in Michoacan, where tobacco-smoking was commoner
than among the Aztec, especially in the case of men of rank.

In general the first meal of the day, taken after a few hours’ work,
consisted in atolli-gruel, a more substantial repast following at
midday, after which the higher classes smoked and took a siesta. Food
was cooked in and eaten from pots, bowls and dishes of pottery, often
beautifully ornamented. Cups of the same material, and also of gold
or stone (such as alabaster), were used for beverages, and a peculiar
pattern with two butterfly-handles and three feet (as shown on the
textile in Fig. 18, _s_; p. 118) was especially associated with
octli, forming one of the devices of the octli-gods.

Maguey-fibre has already been mentioned as a material extensively
employed for textiles, and indeed the uses of this plant were manifold.
To quote again from one of the conquerors, “This tree is of the
greatest utility; from it is made wine, vinegar, honey, a syrup like
boiled grape-juice. They employ it in the manufacture of garments for
men and women, for footgear, ropes, the ties used in building houses,
the roofing of these houses, for sewing-needles (i.e. the spines),
for dressings for wounds, and other purposes. They also collected the
leaves ... and cooked them in subterranean ovens, with wood piled up,
in a fashion peculiar to this country. After roasting, the bark and
veins are removed, and an intoxicating drink is prepared.”

The consideration of Mexican architecture from a comparative standpoint
will be deferred until the remains scattered through the country are
discussed. But as all these remains consist of buildings devoted
to religious purposes, a few words may be said here concerning the
actual habitations of the people. Mexico city was utterly destroyed
by the Spanish, but from the accounts left by the first visitors a
good idea can be gathered of the nature of the buildings. The houses
of the chiefs were spacious, built on terraces, and constructed of
stone and lime. The buildings usually enclosed a court, and there
was often a garden attached where the girls of the household could
walk under the supervision of duennas. The women’s apartments were
separated from the rest; two storeys were sometimes seen, and in
the most important structures the roofs were flat and battlemented.
Nezahualcoyotl’s palace at Tezcoco, of which a native plan is shown in
Fig. 13, p. 89, was constructed on a terrace, and the roofbeams were
supported by wooden pillars on stone bases. The terrace formed a court
in front, approached by steps, and there were many small buildings for
guests, the women of the household, and the retainers. Diaz mentions
the palaces of Iztapalapa “how well-built they were, of beautiful
stone-work and cedar-wood and the wood of other sweet-scented trees;
with great rooms and courts, wonderful to behold, covered with awnings
of cotton cloth.” He also mentions the “great halls and chambers,
canopied with the cloth of the country,” of the palace of Axayacatl,
and the “beds of matting with canopies above” which were provided for
the Spaniards. Earth and unfired bricks (“adobes”) were also used for
the walls of buildings, and the houses of the poorer classes were of
reeds and mud roofed with thatch of straw or maguey-leaves. In Mexico
city, owing to the marshy nature of the ground, a large proportion of
the buildings rested on pile foundations, and, in consequence of the
growth of the town beyond the limit of land-accommodation, many were
built over the water, and could only be reached by boat or drawbridge.
The town itself was intersected by numerous canals, and the inhabitants
went about as much in boats as on land. Near the coast, pile-dwellings
were constructed so that the inhabitants might be out of the reach of
wild beasts, and protecting walls of adobes or wooden palisades were
also found. Beds in most cases were made of rushes, with cotton sheets,
those of the lords being woven with feathers, and for meals a mat was
simply spread upon the ground. The primitive hunting-tribes, such as
the wilder Chichimec, lived chiefly in caves, though some of the more
advanced constructed rude temporary huts. The Tarascans built the walls
of their dwellings of natural stones, and constructed the roof of
straw thatch, with, apparently, a clay ridge. Thatch was in fact the
principal roofing material throughout Mexico, and even the shrines were
usually so covered.

One of the chief features of Mexico city was the series of causeways
which connected the island with the mainland. The position of these,
according to the most recent ideas, can be seen in Fig. 1, p. 13. In
building them a double palisade was first constructed, and the space
between filled with stones and earth faced with rubble. The great dyke
which ran from Iztapalapa to Atzacualco, built by the first Montecuzoma
on the advice of Nezahualcoyotl, was no less than ten miles long, and
was perforated by sluices, by means of which an attempt was made to
control the inundations to which Mexico was subject. The effect of
this feat of engineering was to cause the portion of lake to the west,
called the Lake of Mexico, to become fresh, and to be filled with
wild-fowl and fish, for the springs which fed it contained no salt,
whereas the streams running into the eastern portion still continued
to carry into it the salt which they absorbed on their journey.
Another work of economical importance was the double stone aqueduct
which brought water to the city from Chapultepec. The Mexicans also
constructed roads in various directions throughout the country, for
the use of merchants, couriers, and others who travelled on state
business. Such roads were narrow, of well-beaten earth, and often had
a watercourse running along the side. Like the Peruvian rulers, the
Mexican kings maintained a system of trained runners established at
definite posts along certain roads. Messages and light burdens could be
transferred long distances in a short time by this method, and we hear
of three hundred miles being covered in a day.

  [Illustration: FIG. 29.--The education of children.

   _Left._ Girl learning to spin, and boy being shown the use
   of fishing-implements; age 7 years; daily ration a loaf and a
   half.

   _Right._ Girl being punished with aloe-spines (age 9 years,
   omitted); boy being held over a fire of pepper (age 11 years,
   omitted). Same daily ration.

  (_Mendoza MS., Oxford_)]

The birth of a child was awaited with great expectancy, and the
prospective mother was carefully guarded from all material and
supernatural dangers. The steam-bath was an important institution in
promoting ease of delivery, and invocations were made to the gods
presiding over birth and creation. The child born, the midwife raised
the triumph-cry of the warriors, since the woman who bore a child
was regarded as the feminine counterpart of such, and congratulatory
visits were paid by friends and relations. A fire was lighted in the
house and kept burning for four days; great care was observed that
no light from this should be taken outside the house, since it was
believed that the luck of the household would follow it, and a number
of other precautions were observed. The horoscope of the infant, a
most important matter, was cast by a priest, and a day appointed for
the baptismal ceremony, a lucky date being carefully selected. This
ceremony consisted in sprinkling the infant with water, and giving
it a name. Although the water was supposed to have the effect of
purifying the child and fortifying it against the perils of life, yet
the Mexicans held no doctrine of “original sin,” in fact, the midwife
addressed the newly born in the terms, “When you were created and
sent into this world you were made without stain, and your father
and mother Quetzalcoatl formed you even as a precious stone and as a
jewel of gold of great price.” In the case of a boy, miniature weapons
were prepared for the ceremony, as an indication that he was born a
warrior, while for a girl a small set of weaving-utensils was made,
the symbols of her future status as a housewife. Sahagun states that
some ancestral name was given by the midwife, and other accounts
allege that the name was first pronounced by certain small children
invited for the purpose. Calendrical names, taken from the child’s
birthday, were very common, especially among the Mixtec, but names of
animals were often conferred upon boys, of flowers upon girls. Animal
names were especially common among the Tarascans. Children, no matter
what their rank, were usually nursed by the mother for three or four
years, but in cases of inability, a wet-nurse was carefully chosen.
Children were educated with great care and according to certain rules.
One manuscript shows the progress of children of both sexes, together
with the number of bread-cakes allowed for their diet, from the ages
of three to fifteen (Fig. 29). The punishments applicable to each year
are also shown, starting with a warning, and proceeding to pricking
with aloe-spines, beating, holding over a fire on which pepper had
been thrown, and tying hand and foot. Parents were in the habit of
preaching long homilies to their children, which, however interesting
they may be as illustrating the extremely high moral tone of Mexican
educational ideas, must have been excessively boring to the child. The
Mexicans were greatly addicted to moral discourses, as may be seen from
the work of Sahagun, whole pages of which are devoted to the quotation
in full of the orations appropriate to particular occasions of public
and private interest. Boys as a rule followed the profession of their
father, while girls received a thorough training in the domestic arts,
such as spinning and weaving and the preparation of food. The part
played by the institutions Calmecac and Telpochcalli in the education
of the young has already been mentioned.

Marriage took place at about the age of twenty in the case of men,
girls being a trifle younger. Inter-marriage was allowed between
cousins, but forbidden in the case of nearer relatives. The service
of female go-betweens was employed by the parents of the man, and it
was not considered consonant with a proper dignity for the woman’s
family to show too much haste in consenting to the match. On the
appointed day, selected owing to the auspicious nature of its sign, the
go-between carried the bride to the house of the bridegroom, where,
after offering incense, the two were seated side by side on a mat, and
their garments knotted by a priest. The inevitable homily followed, and
then a feast, and the couple observed a fast for four or more days, at
the end of which the marriage might be consummated. In some cases a
couple might live in concubinage by consent of their parents, and in
the event of a child being born, either a marriage was celebrated or
the woman returned to the house of her parents with the infant, which
was regarded as belonging to her family. Otherwise children belonged to
the man and inherited from him, those of the chief wife (for polygamy,
limited by the man’s means, was practised) having precedence. It was
usual for the eldest son in these cases to make some provision for his
brothers and their families. When a man married he left the educational
establishment where he formerly lived, after asking permission of
his superiors and making certain gifts. As a rule widows could not
remarry, except with a brother-in-law; divorce was possible with the
consent of a magistrate, and the couple could under no circumstances be
reunited. Among the Otomi divorce was allowed after the first night of
married life, but not later. The Chichimec practised monogamy, and no
intermarriage could take place between individuals who were related.
Among the Tarascans however, especially those of rank, different ideas
prevailed, and endogamy was the rule. Even among commoners, if a girl
had given herself to a man against the will of her parents, the union
was regarded as legal only if he belonged to the same ward as herself.
In normal cases the girl was simply handed over to her suitor by the
priest, together with the gift of a wood-cutting axe and the necessary
mats and cord for wood-carrying, and a feast followed. The difference
between the marriage rules of the Tarascans and Aztec seems accompanied
by another sociological divergence, in so far as there are indications
that among the former the children were regarded as belonging to
the mother’s family. The Mixtec ceremony was more like that of the
Aztec, but besides the tying together of the garments of the couple,
it included also the cutting of part of their hair. Polygamy was also
practised in this region.

Much of the time of the more settled peoples of Mexico was devoted to
agriculture, and even a few of the Chichimec tribes, who had absorbed
something of the culture of their more advanced neighbours, reared
a little maize which was tended by serfs. The Otomi also practised
agriculture to some extent. Maize was the most important product of
cultivation, and the respect in which it was held is seen in the
superstition that if a man saw maize-grains lying on the ground and
failed to pick them up, they would cry to the gods for vengeance upon
him. Circumstances, chief of which must be reckoned the restriction
of territory when they first became settled, led to the development
of intensive cultivation among the Aztec, and the invention of the
celebrated “floating gardens.” These were osier rafts, piled with
earth and lake mud, which, so it is said, moved about the surface of
the lake until they were finally anchored by the roots of the trees
which sprang up on their surface. The properties of manure were
known to this people, and it was carefully collected for use in the
plantations. The implements of agriculture were simple, consisting
of a hoe or a spade and a basket. The heavy work, such as preparing
the fields, planting and reaping, was performed by the men, while the
women assisted in winnowing the crop and weeding. The fields on the
mainland were surrounded with adobe walls or aloe hedges, and the crop
was stored in wooden granaries. The Mixtec had the habit, when rain was
expected, of breaking the maize-stalks so that the heads hung downward;
in this position they were protected by the leaves from excessive
moisture, and were easily dried by the sun and wind. Next to maize,
cotton, cacao, aloe, pepper, and the grain called _chia_ were the
most important plants, though the first three could be grown only in
districts where the climate was hot. Hunting, both individually and
in communal drives, was practised by all the tribes, and the Mexicans
generally were expert trackers and huntsmen. We hear of one drive
organized for the Spaniards in which eleven thousand Otomi beaters took
part, embracing a circle of fifteen miles. The chief weapons employed
were bows, darts, blow-guns, nets and snares. Fishing was equally
important, in fact more so among the tribes in the neighbourhood
of lakes, nets and tridents being the principal appliances used.
The invention of these was attributed to the god Opochtli, one of
the Tlaloque. Fowling also gave employment to a large number of the
population and contributed greatly to the food-supply.

  [Illustration: FIG. 30.--Tlaxtli-court and players.

  (_Bodleian MS., Oxford_)]

With regard to the lighter side of life it would not be going too far
to state that nearly all of the amusements of the Mexicans possessed a
religious significance. It is true that the lords maintained jesters
and tumblers, and that the performances of conjurers, as mentioned
above, were much appreciated. But the national game, tlaxtli, was
closely connected with the worship of the gods, and the tlaxtli-courts
both at Mexico and in Michoacan were generally associated with
temples. The ground-plan of a tlaxtli-court resembled a double T,
as may be seen from Fig. 30, which is taken from a manuscript. The
game was played with a rubber ball, and the end walls constituted the
goals which were protected by opposing teams of players. At the centre
of each side wall, near its upper edge, was fixed a stone ring, the
aperture a little greater than the diameter of the ball, and if the
latter could be hit so as to pass through the ring, a victory was
claimed. The walls were forty or fifty feet long, and twenty or thirty
feet apart, and the whole court was carefully plastered. The area was
divided by a line, which the ball had to cross for the throw to count;
it is not stated whether this line was longitudinal or transverse, but
probability seems to favour the latter. The MSS. often show the two
ends of the court distinguished by different colours, though it is only
fair to state that they almost as often show it quartered. The players
wore special gauntlets, but the most esteemed variety of the game was
that in which they were not allowed the use of their hands at all, but
struck the ball with their hips, protected by means of a leather shield
attached to the girdle. A variety of gods are pictured in association
with the tlaxtli-court, principally Tezcatlipoca, Quetzalcoatl,
Xochiquetzal and Xochipilli, and in the court connected with the great
temple to Uitzilopochtli stood the statues of the gods Oappatzan and
Amapan to which sacrifices were made. Seler conjectures that the flight
of the ball in its esoteric significance referred to the movements
of the moon. The game was usually played for stakes, which often ran
very high, and it also served to settle disputed questions, as in the
case where Montecuzoma, differing from Nezahualpilli as regards the
interpretation of certain omens, challenged him to a game of tlaxtli
and was defeated. The origin of the game is discussed later (pp.
302–303).

Other amusements, of a more secular nature, were the game called
patolli, played with “men” on a board bearing a cruciform diagram, and
tololoque, a variety of dice. Both these were played for stakes.

  [Illustration: FIG. 31.--Carved wooden gong
  (_teponaztli_).

  (_British Museum_)]

Music was not highly developed, and there was but little variety in the
musical instruments throughout the valley. Rattles of gourd or pottery
were common, but the principal instrument of percussion was the gong,
teponaztli, formed of a hollow cylinder of wood with two tongues, each
of a different note, which were struck with beaters, sometimes headed
with rubber. The teponaztli was often beautifully carved, and played
an important part in religious ceremonies and dances (Fig. 31). Drums,
ueuetl, with skin membranes were also in common use, while instruments
of a rather special nature consisted of tortoise carapaces (or their
facsimiles in gold), struck with a stick, and serrated bones rubbed
with short rods (see p. 103). Wind instruments appear to have been few
in variety; conches, provided apparently with a wooden mouthpiece, like
those of the New Zealanders, were sounded in most religious ceremonies,
and quantities of whistles and ocarinas have been discovered. The
finger-holes do not exceed four in number, and are frequently less
in the case of instruments of the flageolet type. Whistles were of
frequent use in war, for the purpose of giving signals. Whether the
Mexicans, like the tribes of the north-west coast of America, were
acquainted with reed instruments is uncertain, at any rate none are
known to exist; it is quite possible that they were known, but that the
reeds, constructed of perishable materials, have not survived until
our time. Singing was another important accompaniment of religious
ceremonies, and there were specially trained temple choirs under
the control of responsible officials. Many of the hymns have been
preserved, and illustrate well the poetical cast of Mexican thought.
A species of primitive drama was said to exist, recited on a terrace
in the market-place or temple-court. Dancing was highly developed, and
every feast had its ceremonial dance which was carried out with great
solemnity and decorum. In some cases the dancers formed large circles,
the members of each belonging to one sex and rank. In others, the sexes
mingled, and in others again the dancers performed in pairs, with their
arms round one another’s waists or necks. The last method seems to have
been the privilege of the upper classes. In combined figures a long
garlanded rope was held by the dancers, who moved their bodies and
limbs in unison, as in Peru, while occasionally they danced in threes,
two women and one man or two men and one woman.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XII_



   _Photo. C. B. Waite_

  MEXICO

  MOUNDS AT SAN JUAN TEOTIHUACAN, SEEN FROM THE “PYRAMID OF
  THE MOON”]




        CHAPTER VII--MEXICO: ARCHITECTURAL REMAINS AND POTTERY


Now that a sketch has been given of the beliefs and mode of life of
the Ancient Mexicans, it is necessary to deal in some measure with
the remains of their culture scattered over the country. As far as
architecture is concerned, the greater proportion of ruined buildings
must be considered to have been either temples or structures associated
in some way with religion, and perhaps government. The Mexicans
gave of their best to the gods, and though the _corvée_ system
enabled large numbers of men to be employed at one time on works of
considerable magnitude, the rulers seem to have spent more care on
the buildings erected for the service of their deities than on their
own habitations. The peculiar feature of Mexican architecture lies
in the fact that every building of importance was erected upon a
substructure, terrace or truncated pyramid, which, though essentially
secondary in importance to the building or buildings with which it was
crowned, yet represented a vast amount of labour, many hundred times
greater than that expended on the superstructure. This feature has been
unfortunate, in a sense, for Mexican archæology, since the pyramidal
mounds, once the superimposed buildings have disappeared, present
a superficial analogy to the pyramids of Egypt. There can however
be no real comparison, the Egyptian pyramid represented a building
in itself, while the Mexican was in essence a mere accessory. The
foundation-mounds must be distinguished from the mounds of the northern
Pueblo region, which are formed for the most part of the debris
of buildings which have fallen into decay. True foundation-mounds
are rarely found north of a line drawn, roughly, from La Quemada in
Zacatecas to the Gulf of Mexico in the region of the Panuco valley;
but south of it, right down to Honduras, they are a characteristic
feature of architecture. There was a large number of temple pyramids,
of varied dimensions, in Tenochtitlan (Sahagun gives a long list), but
two were of outstanding importance, one in Tenochtitlan proper, the
other in the suburb of Tlaltelolco. Both were so utterly destroyed by
the Spaniards that it is not easy at the present time to fix their
exact position. The most recent, and most successful, attempt to
work out the details of the great Mexican temple from all sources,
literary and archæological, is that of Maudslay, to which reference
can be made by those wishing for more minute particulars (see also
Fig. 12; p. 87). The pyramid, or teocalli, stood at the eastern end of
a large court, about 300 by 350 yards, surrounded by a wall on which
were carved snakes. It was built in five tiers, of earth and stones
faced with masonry; the base measured something over 100 yards, and
the upper surface over 70 yards square. A flight of more than 100
steps on the west side gave access to the summit, and on the eastern
edge of the latter were two shrines, each of two storeys, built, as
seems most probable, chiefly of wood. These two shrines were dedicated
respectively to Uitzilopochtli (towards the south) and Tlaloc (towards
the north), and faced west, but the priests and worshippers would face
east, the direction of the rising sun, and there is reason to believe
that the equinox was calculated by observing the rising of the sun
between the two shrines. In front of the latter was the sacrificial
stone, and below, in the court, a number of other temples, priestly
residences, and other ceremonial buildings, including a tlaxtli-court
and the tzompantli, or frame upon which were erected the skulls of
sacrificial victims. The other temples in the court included one to
Tezcatlipoca, one in circular form to Quetzalcoatl, and one to the
planet Venus (Tlauizcalpantecutli), whose image was painted on a pillar
in the shrine. The Tlaltelolco temple was similar, though a little
larger, and supported two shrines dedicated, the one to Uitzilopochtli
and the other to Tezcatlipoca. Larger than either of these imposing
buildings was the teocalli of Quetzalcoatl at Cholula. This still
exists, though in sadly mutilated form; the length of its base was
calculated by Humboldt as nearly 440 metres. For an example of an
ordinary Mexican shrine, as exemplified in ruins, it is necessary to
go outside what is strictly Aztec territory. Near Cuernavaca, in the
Tlalhuica district, among rocky peaks towering above the valley, is
the temple of Tepoztlan (Pl. XIV, 2), dedicated probably to one of the
octli-gods (Tepoztecatl). This region formed one of the early Mexican
conquests and the temple bears the name of the Mexican king Auitzotl
and the date of his death. Seen from the east, the building appears to
be a three-tiered pyramid, the upper tier in reality being the back of
the shrine. The walls are of porous volcanic stone set in mortar, and
the roof was similarly constructed. The shrine is a simple rectangular
building with an inner chamber (of the type Fig. 76, 4; p. 327), and
the interior is ornamented with carvings. The front wall is pierced by
three doorways, separated by quadrangular pillars, which are in reality
sections of the wall. In front, on the lower terrace, is a quadrangular
“altar,” probably corresponding to the quauhxicalli at Mexico. Another,
and somewhat similar temple, also apparently of Aztec origin, is found
at Teayo, near Tuxpan in the Huaxtec country. This is a three-tiered
pyramid, about forty feet high, faced with sandstone blocks over which
a coat of stucco has been laid. At the top is a simple quadrangular
shrine (of the type Fig. 76, 1), with stuccoed and frescoed interior,
standing on a low terrace. The stairway is on the west side, and
the worshippers therefore faced east, as in the case of the temples
already mentioned. This, we are told, was the proper orientation for
Mexican temples of the first importance. But of far greater interest
and importance than these two small temples are the extensive remains
at Teotihuacan, close to Mexico, a site intimately connected with the
Toltec and mentioned in Mexican myth as the scene of the rising of the
historical sun. At the present day this site presents the appearance
of a conglomeration of mounds varying greatly in size and spread over
so large an area that their bulk is difficult to realize. The two
principal features are two vast pyramids, from the smaller of which
runs a depressed road, two to three hundred feet wide, past the other
for a distance of nearly two miles in a straight line. This road is
interrupted by several low embankments and small pyramids, and bordered
by a large number of mounds arranged in series. At the southern end
of the road and to the east is a complex of mounds, arranged in a
square and including a pyramid of some size. The photograph figured
on Pl. XII is taken from the summit of the lesser of the two great
pyramids, usually called the “pyramid of the moon,” and looks down
the sunk roadway, called the “road of the dead.” The greater pyramid,
or “pyramid of the sun,” appears in the centre of the picture, but
the complex of mounds towards the southern end of the road is barely
visible. The “pyramid of the sun” measures about 700 feet along the
base, and the sides rise at an angle of 45 degrees to a platform about
100 feet square. Both it and the surrounding mounds are composed of
masses of local earth and stone and adobe (unbaked clay). It was
originally faced with roughly dressed stone and received a final coat
of stucco. Beneath the outer facing a second has been discovered at
some depth, and it may be that several such were constructed during
the process of building in order to give solidity to the mass; but
it is more likely that the outer layer represents an addition to the
original building. Other evidence of phases in construction have been
discovered in some of the mounds, in cases where an entire building
has been filled solid in order to support a later edifice above it.
Growth by accretion of this nature was a feature of many of the Maya
sites, as will be seen later. It is probable that this mighty pyramid
was approached by a stairway on its western face from the “path of the
dead.” The general assemblage of the lesser mounds seems to exhibit
more evidence of design than many Mexican ruins, and the whole site
bears the stamp of considerable antiquity as well as long-continued
occupation. In particular is to be noticed a tendency to group the
mounds round quadrangular courts, a tendency which, as will be seen
later, is characteristic of the Zapotec area. The district from early
times bore the reputation of a burial-ground of great sanctity, and
the lesser mounds were at first believed to be burial-tumuli (whence
the name “path of the dead” given to the sunk roadway). Excavation
however, as far as carried out, seems to prove that the greater number
supported buildings of a residential nature, many of them of an
unusually complex ground-plan. The walls were of lava fragments and
adobe, dressed with mortar. The roofs of the larger apartments were
supported on pillars, probably of wood, of which the rectangular bases,
similar in construction to the walls, have been found. Stone-carving is
practically non-existent, probably for the same reason that there are
no well-dressed stone facings, viz. unsuitability of local material;
but the interiors were ornamented with frescoes in beautiful colours in
which plant motives play an important part.

  [Illustration: 1]

  [Illustration:

   _Photo F. J. Cooper Clark_

  2

  MEXICO

    1. TEMPLE AT XOCHICALCO, RESTORED (AFTER HOLMES)
    2. TEMPLE AT XOCHICALCO, PRESENT CONDITION]

The ruins most nearly resembling those at Teotihuacan are found at
Monte Alban in Zapotec territory, on a lofty ridge overlooking the city
of Oaxaca. Holmes describes the appearance of the site as it struck him
when he had climbed the long ascent from the latter city as follows:
“The surface was not covered with scattered and obscure piles of ruins
as I had expected, but the whole mountain had been remodelled by the
hand of man until not a trace of natural contour remained. There was
a vast system of level courts enclosed by successive terraces, and
bordered by pyramids upon pyramids. Even the sides of the mountain
descended in a succession of terraces, and the whole crest, separated
by the hazy atmosphere from the dimly seen valleys more than a thousand
feet below, and isolated completely from the blue range beyond, seemed
suspended in mid-air.” The quadrangular assemblage of foundation-mounds
round courts is even more noticeable here than at Teotihuacan,
though the limitations of the available building space rendered the
arrangement less free on the whole. Most of the mounds seem to have
been faced with quartzite blocks, barely dressed at all owing to the
hard nature of the stone, and carved ornament is not very common. Few
traces of buildings have been discovered, but excavation is by no
means complete; however, the foundations of at least one structure
with a complex arrangement of chambers have been laid bare, and it
is earnestly to be hoped that some properly qualified archæologist
may be entrusted with the task of thorough investigation. Monte Alban
is further remarkable for the presence of sculptured grave-slabs and
pillars bearing designs and inscriptions in a peculiar style (similar
to Fig. 15; p. 106). Many Mexican day-signs can be recognized, but
some of the glyphs are enclosed in “cartouches” of Maya style (to
anticipate), and are accompanied by numerals in which five is expressed
by a bar, another Maya characteristic. Carvings in similar style
are found at other sites in the Zapotec area. Not unlike Monte Alban
are the better preserved ruins at Quiengola, near Tehuantepec, and
here the quadrangular arrangement of foundation-mounds round courts
takes a very definite form. Some of these mounds are in the form of
three-tiered pyramids (Fig. 32, _b_), others of long terraces
supporting buildings divided into a succession of simple chambers,
each opening on the terrace, and occasionally enclosing a small shrine
(Fig. 32, _a_). The latter bear a striking resemblance to Maya
buildings, as will be seen later (compare Figs. 76, _b_, and
77; pp. 327 and 329). Adobe was used in large quantities in these
buildings, and clay as mortar, and certain groups of structures are
found which are decidedly complex in arrangement. At Tlacolula, a site
rather similar to Quiengola, cyclopean masonry is found, and at Xoxo in
the same district we have mounds built of earthy material with frequent
horizontal layers of mortar, a peculiarity also seen at Tlacolula at
Monte Alban, and again at Cholula, a city closely associated with
Toltec culture. In the same district are found sculptured slabs in a
style similar to those of Monte Alban, and in both regions occur stone
heads, usually so flattened as to present an axe-like appearance, with
a projection at the back for insetting in a wall (Fig. 33, _c_).

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XIV_

  [Illustration: 1]



   _Photos. C. B. Waite_

  2

  ZAPOTEC

  1. INTERIOR OF CHAMBER AT MITLA, OAXACA (_See
  Plate XV_)

  MEXICO

  2. TEMPLE AT TEPOZTLAN]

  [Illustration: FIG. 32.--Plans of remains at
  Quiengola, Oaxaca.

    A. Court with terrace supporting buildings.
    B. Pyramid with Temple.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 33.--_a._ Stone slab from
  near Xochicalco.

  _b._ Pottery beaker, bearing the date _2. xochitl_,
  Zapotec.

  _c._ Stone head, Oaxaca.]

The characteristic Oaxaca slabs, with their dates in mixed Mexican
and Maya style, have their parallel in the carvings on what must have
been an extremely beautiful temple at Xochicalco in the Tlalhuica
region. This ruin, though in the same district as the Aztec temple
of Tepoztlan, is of an entirely different type and the style of its
rich ornamentation bears a close resemblance to the remains at Tulan,
one of the Toltec cities. Its present condition is shown on Pl. XIII
together with a restoration by Holmes. It is only fair to state that
this distinguished archæologist has since modified his ideas regarding
its original form, and it should be said that the pillars dividing
the doorway would almost certainly have had perpendicular faces. With
this exception and with the further exception of some doubt attaching
to the exact form of the roof, the picture gives a very good idea of
what the temple must have been. The substructure, with the noticeable
“batter” of its walls and projecting cornice, is over four yards high,
of rubble faced with andesite; the carving represents great undulating
snakes, between the coils of which are human figures, and glyphs in
the style of those of Oaxaca described above. Originally the details
of sculpture were emphasized by coloured stucco and therefore appeared
far less complicated than in a photograph. In this building again the
stairway was on the west side.

  [Illustration: FIG. 34.--Plan of a court and
  buildings at Mitla. The building to the right is shown on Pl.
  XV.]

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XV_



   _Photo. C. B. Waite_

  ZAPOTEC

  RUINS AT MITLA, OAXACA; PARTLY RESTORED]

To return to Oaxaca, the most important group of ruins awaits
consideration. These are at Mitla, the sacred Zapotec city, and are
distinguished by many peculiarities which render them almost unique.
Here the quadrangular arrangement of buildings round courts attains its
most definite form. In two cases one of these buildings, on the east
side, is a pyramid, and therefore presumably approached, as usual, from
the west. The rest consist of long low buildings upon terraces, opening
as a rule only upon the court which they surround, though in two cases
one such building gives access at the back to another court, entirely
enclosed by similar buildings, which has no other entrance (Fig. 34).
The material is rubble, faced with trachyte blocks set in mortar;
the wall-surfaces are broken by sunk panels filled with the mosaic
geometrical ornament which gives this site a character of its own (Pls.
XIV, 1, and XV). Each block constituting the mosaic bears on its face
in relief some detail entering into the design, but the blocks are not
uniform, and each therefore was cut and fitted to its particular place,
a method entailing enormous labour, especially when it is realized
that over eighty thousand were employed in the ornamentation of one
quadrangle alone. The blocks taper somewhat at the back, so that they
were set in the mortar as a tooth in the gum, a feature seen also in
Maya buildings. The designs are obviously based on the textile art,
and find their closest parallel in some of the coastal buildings of
Peru (though similar mosaics have been found at Tlacolula, also in
Zapotec territory). Stucco was not used here for moulded ornament,
though it was employed for finishing defective points in the facing.
Traces of red colour are found on the mosaic panels. The durable yet
comparatively soft trachyte found in the neighbouring hills afforded
the Zapotec builder far more tractable material than at other sites;
the result was that large masses of stone were used in construction,
such as lintels from ten to twenty feet long and weighing from ten to
fifteen tons, as well as cylindrical pillars used to support the roof
in the broader buildings. Indications show that the roof consisted of
logs, probably covered with canes supporting a layer of masonry and
cement. The quarries of the ancient builders have been discovered in
the hills, together with the rude stone picks by means of which they
hewed out the blocks, and, as Holmes writes, “the feats of engineering
necessary to transport masses of stone many tons in weight down a
thousand feet of precipitous mountain-face, accomplished by these
stone-age quarry-men, would be regarded as important undertakings, even
by our enterprising engineers of to-day.” It is an interesting fact
that numbers of stone flakes and cores are found in the mortar of the
constructed buildings, and it is possible that these may have been used
in the final dressing of the stone on the spot. In one of the buildings
a fresco in red and white has been discovered on the cornice. This is
in a style rather resembling certain Oaxacan and Cholulan pottery, and
bears also an analogy to certain frescoes in British Honduras (compare
Figs. 79 and 80; pp. 335 and 336). Various mythological figures are
represented, including Mixcoatl (Fig. 35) and his double-headed
deer, and it would seem probable that they have been added at a date
considerably later than the construction of the buildings. Of the
use of the buildings Burgoa gives particulars, assigning one group
to the king, another to the priests, and so forth. But as he speaks
of upper storeys, of which no traces are apparent, his account can
hardly be considered sufficiently trustworthy to be given in detail.
The same author writes also of extensive subterranean chambers, but
with the exception of two cruciform souterrains of comparatively small
dimensions, nothing of that nature has yet been discovered.

  [Illustration: Fig. 35.--Portion of a fresco at Mitla; figure
  of the god Mixcoatl.

  (_After Seler_)]

The quadrangular grouping of buildings round courts recalls at once
the statement of Sahagun respecting the pre-Aztec temples at Tulan.
One of these, he writes, was composed of four buildings, that to the
east being ornamented with gold, that to the north with red jasper
and red shells, that to the west with turquoise, and that to the south
with silver and white shells. The other temple was similar, save that
the interior decoration of the buildings was of feathers, yellow, red,
blue and white respectively. If the tradition is founded on fact, we
may safely conclude that the buildings were arranged round a court,
and the colours of their ornamentation suggest that this arrangement
was connected with the regard paid by the Mexicans generally to the
world-directions (see p. 78).

Passing further north, the remains of pyramids and terraces have been
found at Placeres del Oro in Guerrero; these are built of natural or
roughly-worked boulders, but they have not yet been excavated and it
is impossible to say yet what may be their arrangement or what class
of buildings they may have supported. The peculiar stone slabs found
there (Fig. 16; p. 107) have been mentioned, which bear a certain
resemblance to one found in the neighbourhood of Xochicalco (Fig. 33,
_a_; p. 176), which itself appears to be related to those from
Oaxaca (Fig. 15; p. 106). The Placeres del Oro slabs, however, are
almost more like certain Peruvian work than anything else, and full
excavation of this extremely interesting site is highly desirable; it
is worthy of note that the latter slabs bear no glyphs. At Pazcuaro
in Michoacan we hear of a three-tiered pyramid of flat stones piled
together without mortar, the corners being formed of unworked blocks;
but in Tarascan territory are found foundation-mounds of a specialized
type, consisting of a terrace from the centre of which a spur projects
at right angles, terminating in a circular platform. These are known
by the name _yacata_, the term applied locally to Michoacan
temples, and photographs seem to show horizontal layers of cement in
their construction as in the Tlacolula buildings. On the evidence
of manuscripts the temple buildings in this district seem to have
been of a tower-like nature. Two varieties are shown, one on a square
foundation, the other on a circular ground-plan and sometimes with a
peculiar domed roof. Further north still, at La Quemada in Zacatecas,
occurs an extremely interesting group of ruins, built along a lofty
ridge. These remains, the most northerly yet discovered bearing a
distinctly “Mexican” character, cover an extensive area and display
considerable complexity. The flanks of the hills forming the ridge are
built up steeply with terraced walls, and the summits are artificially
levelled and broadened with terraces. The lower works seem to be of a
defensive nature, and the more important buildings above consist of
an intricate series of foundation-mounds, sunk courts, and occasional
pyramids. From the summit radiates a system of stuccoed roads, most
of which terminate in small pyramids lower down. The quadrangular
arrangement of the more important structures is very noticeable, and
one of the larger halls evidently possessed a roof supported on large
circular pillars, built, like the walls and terraces, of unsquared
stone blocks set in earth mixed with grass. The Spaniards found the
ruins uninhabited, and the surrounding agricultural and hunting
population of Zacatec stated that the inhabitants had migrated in the
direction of Mexico after a drought lasting several years.

With the exception of the pyramid at Teayo, described above, which
seems to be an Aztec ruin, the architectural remains of the Huaxtec
and Totonac appear in certain respects to resemble rather those of
the Maya, their linguistic relations to the south. At the same time
it is advisable to make some mention of them in this place, firstly
because the coastal region in this direction had been subjected for
some time to Aztec influences, and secondly because Aztec pottery
cannot be adequately described without reference to the ceramic art of
the Huaxtec and Totonac. Foundation-mounds occur throughout the whole
region from the mouth of the Panuco to Vera Cruz, and afford a splendid
field to future explorers. The Panuco district shows abundant traces of
settlement from very early times; the mounds are of earth, sometimes
faced with cut stone, but traces of walls are rare throughout the whole
of the Huaxtec region. In the Cerro de Nahuatlan, the pyramids are
again of earth or rubble, faced with more or less regularly squared
sandstone blocks; some are circular in ground-plan, and the corners
of the rectangular ruins are often formed of well-worked monoliths.
At Papantla is a remarkable pyramid, faced with cut stone, the
distinguishing feature of which is constituted by a series of niches,
which may at some time have contained images. This is figured on Pl.
XVI, and further description is unnecessary, though it may be said that
niches of this character may be found to be a characteristic of Totonac
architecture.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XVI_

   _Photo. Prof. Seler_

  TOTONAC

  TEMPLE AT PAPANTLA, VERA CRUZ]

In the neighbourhood of Cempoala a very interesting series of ruins
is to be found. These consist of mounds on which traces of buildings
remain, and which, owing to the lack of stone suitable for building
in the district, are constructed of a core of waterworn stones set
in concrete with good concrete facing. The highly polished concrete
facing of Totonac buildings attracted the notice of the Spaniards, who
thought at first that they were ornamented with silver plates. The
mounds are either of the normal step-pyramid type, or are built in
two very distinct tiers, each with a separate balustraded stairway,
of the types Fig. 73, _c_ and _e_; p. 321. Both are erected
on slightly-raised artificial bases, and the buildings found on the
summits are rather more complicated than the simple shrines believed
to be characteristic of the Aztec temples. In this respect they bear
a closer resemblance to certain of the Maya remains which will be
described later. One of these buildings consists of a series of
chambers, like the buildings at Quiengola described above (Fig. 32,
_a_; p. 175), though on a smaller scale; another consists of a
shrine standing free within an exterior building. Other similarities to
Oaxaca remains include the presence of pillars to support a roof, found
in a building in the neighbourhood, and again on a foundation-mound at
San Isidro, immediately south of Misantla; and also numbers of heads,
but in this case of clay, which appear to have been inset in the walls.
At Texolo are mounds some of which are of earth alone, and these are
occasionally arranged in a double row to enclose a court. Stone facing
however is not unknown in this district.

Of architectural remains as a whole it may be said that the Aztec
buildings show a tendency to simplicity and exhibit on the whole fewer
traces of arrangement on a large and comprehensive plan, such as may
be observed at Teotihuacan. Teotihuacan itself, as far as actual
buildings are concerned, has many points in common with Tulan, and in
its general arrangement shows a considerable similarity to Monte Alban.
The last-named site is obviously closely connected with other remains
in Oaxaca; and Xochicalco, from its decoration, has similar affinities,
affinities which extend to the pre-Aztec remains of the valley. Mitla
stands practically by itself as far as artistic ornamentation is
concerned, though the arrangement of the buildings is quite Oaxacan
in character. The Totonac ruins display a certain affinity with the
ruins at Quiengola, though this affinity cannot be said to be direct.
The true relation between the two will be more apparent after the Maya
remains have been considered. It is unsafe to draw any conclusion from
structural points alone, since so much depended upon the presence in
the neighbourhood of suitable materials; it was, for instance, the
presence of trachyte in the Mitla region which enabled its builders to
make use of large masses of stone, and provided the long lintels which
distinguish this group of ruins. Where suitable stone was lacking, the
deficiency was usually supplied by cement, and much use was made of the
latter to correct irregularities in construction, though its employment
appears to have been more frequent in Oaxaca and the Totonac region
than elsewhere.

  [Illustration: FIG. 36.--Mexican pottery forms (see
  also Pls. XVII-XIX).

    1–3. Valley of Mexico.     4. Oaxaca.
    5–9. Island of Sacrificios.

  (_British Museum_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 37.--Designs from Mexican
  pottery; late valley type.]

The art of pottery was highly developed amongst all the tribes hitherto
mentioned, in spite of the facts that the use of the potter’s wheel was
unknown, and that the method of firing was very primitive. No kilns
were constructed, but the pots were fired by means of wood fuel in the
open air, perhaps in a hole in the ground. The quality of the potting
varies considerably according to locality, but the finer examples,
such as the ware from Cholula and the Totonac district, exhibit a
very high standard of paste, form and technique, though the potters
of this region of America cannot boast such consummate mastery over
their material as the early inhabitants of the Peruvian coast. The
fact, that in the later years prior to the conquest pottery had become
an article of trade and tribute, led to a wide dispersal of local
types from centres of manufacture which had acquired a reputation for
skill in the art; and considerable borrowing of forms and ornament
had resulted. At the same time, provided that the possibility of
importation be not overlooked, the pottery remains afford much valuable
evidence as to the interrelation of the tribes and the early history
of the country. The coordination of this evidence is however only
just at its commencement; careful excavations with due regard to the
stratification of remains have been made at a few points in the valley,
and the results have proved of such importance that similar researches
throughout the whole of Mexico and Central America are most earnestly
desired by all students of American archæology. In the valley of Mexico
the local ware manufactured under the Aztec _régime_ is easily
recognizable. Fragments of coarse undecorated vessels are found,
which appear to have been made by the simple expedient of plastering
a basket over with clay and then firing, the basket being destroyed
in the process. But the most characteristic ware falls into two main
varieties. The first is moulded of an orange or reddish yellow clay,
fairly well baked, but often showing a dark line down the middle of
a fracture; the walls of the vessels are very thin, and the surfaces
carefully smoothed, though not highly burnished. The commonest forms
are shallow tripod bowls (Fig. 36, 3), standing cups and jugs with
handles, and the ornament consists of small geometrical designs in
black (Fig. 37). Moulded ornament is not common, though gadrooned
bodies are occasionally found; incised decoration is confined to the
utilitarian process of scoring the bottoms of bowls for use as graters
in the preparation of peppersauce (_chilmolli_), and applied
ornament is practically non-existent. Miniature tripod bowls with
smooth bottoms are found, used to support the revolving spindle in the
operation of spinning, and incense-spoons were also manufactured in
this ware. The second main type consists chiefly of hour-glass shaped
standing cups, of reddish, softer paste, with thicker walls coated with
a burnished red slip and painted with black and white linear designs
also in slip (Fig. 36, 2). Less common are bowls of greyish paste
with burnished red and yellow slip coating, on which are well-drawn
curvilinear patterns in black, or bowls of grey ware with a very
highly burnished yellow slip with a matt design in slip of similar
colour. Characteristic, too, of this district are two-handled censers,
heavy and solid in construction, of grey clay with a black burnished
surface, or of reddish clay with a burnished red slip (Fig. 36, 1).
Besides vessels, pottery figurines are found in great numbers, in the
form of various gods, warriors, miniature temples, and so forth (Pl.
IX, 2–6). These are in a hard red ware or a very soft pale cream clay;
some are solid, while others are hollow and form rattles or whistles;
most of these figurines were evidently made in moulds. Excavations
have shown that the valley type of pottery occurs only in the surface
layers, and is therefore comparatively recent and represents a period
of short duration; beneath it, and extending to a considerable depth,
are found fragments of a ware which is especially associated with the
ruined city of Teotihuacan. The most characteristic form belonging to
this period is a circular bowl with vertical, or almost vertical, sides
supported on three feet, either flat or of the cascabel type (Fig. 38).
These vases are usually coated with a burnished red, yellow, brown or
black slip, and are either plain or are ornamented with bold incised
curvilinear patterns, or human and animal masks moulded in relief.
Impressed designs were also applied by means of stamps. Flat shallow
bowls of this ware are also found, and graceful vases with everted
lip, but the finest specimens are covered with polychrome ornament of
a peculiar technique. The design is engraved in the outer slip, and
the background cut away, leaving the former standing out against the
matt colour of the paste; in some cases the intaglio portions have
received a coating of cinnabar or vermilion, and in the most beautiful
examples the excised portions have been filled with slip of various
colours, rendering the finished vase a kind of polychrome champ-levé
in clay, a vivid blue-green being the most prominent colour. Vases
are also found with a design produced by the alternation of matt and
burnished surfaces. A peculiar feature of Teotihuacan is constituted by
the innumerable small pottery heads which are found there (Pl. IX, 3).
These are in a hard reddish clay, and appear to have been made by hand
and not in moulds. Many are without attributes, and among the others
only the god Tlaloc can be identified with certainty. One class of head
is shown with a turban-like head-dress, which, as will be seen later,
is characteristic of the Maya (e.g. Fig. 81; p.339); a figure with
similar head-dress usually forms the support of the circular pattern of
censer characteristic of this Teotihuacan culture.

  [Illustration: FIG. 38.--Pottery vase from Teotihuacan.]

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XV._

    _British Museum_

  MEXICO

  1. SPEAR-THROWER, _ATLATL_

  TARASCAN

  2–6. POTTERY FROM GUADALAJARA

  ZAPOTEC

  7–9. FUNERARY VASES, FROM OAXACA

  (Scale: 1, ⅙th; 2–9, ⅛th)]

Mixed with the lowest layers of fragments of this type, are ruder
remains of a different character. This pottery is yellow or red and
often unburnished, though a red or white slip is sometimes found;
it is thick and not so well baked, and moulded rims are common. The
ornament consists in bands or knobs in relief, and in series of incised
lines or circles. Vase-feet are found in numbers, and occasionally
handles, often in the form of a human hand. Pottery figurines are
frequent, but of a type different from those of the superior cultures;
they are hand-made, with applied details, the heads are long, the
waists narrow and the thighs exaggerated. For the most part they are
represented in the nude, and red and white paint is used as ornament.
The close correspondence which these remains bear to those of the
Tarascans (Pl. XVII, 2–6) described below, seems to prove that before
the blossoming of the “Toltec” culture, the valley was peopled by
tribes similar in ethnography to the inhabitants of Michoacan. With
regard to the relative positions of these three types of remains, it
should be mentioned that at Azcapotzalco the earliest and coarsest
occupied a stratum of 2·10 metres and it must be concluded that the
culture which they represent was of some considerable duration; while
their overlapping with the superimposed Teotihuacan types, indicates
a gradual change from the one to the other. The Teotihuacan stratum
was found to be no less than 3·25 metres in thickness, representing
an even longer period; while the “valley” type occurs on the surface
and to a depth only of 0·40 metres, and shows no overlapping with the
remains below, thus indicating an abrupt transition.

The Tarascan remains (Pl. XVII, 2–6) which are found in numbers
from Lake Pazcuaro to Lake Chapala, bear a close resemblance to the
fragments from the lowest strata of the valley. The paste is usually
well-mixed, but not so well fired as the Aztec and Teotihuacan ware,
and constantly shows at a fracture a dark line at the core, the
properly baked portion being in the main a greyish buff. A burnished
red slip is often employed, with pattern in white, the latter being
frequently furnished with an incised outline. The most common shapes
are vases and bowls with three solid or cascabel feet, the latter
enclosing rattles, vases with moulded bodies or in human or animal
form, and plain vases with rounded bases, a feature uncommon throughout
the rest of the area which forms the subject of this section. Bowls
with incised bottoms, to serve as graters, are common, and the incised
lines are sometimes arranged swastika-wise, a feature found again in
Cuicatlan pottery. Miniature tripod bowls to use in connection with
the spindle also occur, and the painted ornament of these and larger
vessels shows a tendency to asymmetry. In the Tarascan area, extending
far to the north, are found occasional vases in the clay “champ-levé”
described above, together with traces of the brilliant blue-green
ornament. Figurines of all sizes are common in this area, often covered
with a red slip and painted black and white. Many of these represent
men and women engaged in their ordinary occupations, and illustrate
well the shoulder-cloaks, large ear-rings and head-bands worn by this
people. Some are flat and solid, others hollow, but most show elongated
heads, and often exaggerated thighs and slender waists.

  [Illustration: FIG. 39.--Polychrome pottery vase;
  Tlaxcalan or Cholulan style, found in Mexico city.

  (_After Seler_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 40.--Polychrome pottery vase
  from Tlaxcala.

  (_After Seler_)]

We must now consider the finest pottery in Mexico, viz. the ware
characteristic of Cholula and Tlaxcala, which seems to bear certain
relations to that of Oaxaca on the one hand, and, though less
obviously, to that of the Totonac region on the other. The fact that
Cholula was recognized as the leading centre of pottery manufacture
and exported its wares in considerable quantity in times preceding
and up to the conquest, renders the distinction between local types
difficult, especially as the Totonac region seems to have been affected
by Mexican conquest, and to have furnished tribute in pots. The typical
ware of Cholula and Tlaxcala is hard and reddish, very well-mixed and
fired, and rarely shows a dark line in the centre of a fracture. Forms
include standing-bowls and -cups, tripod bowls and vases, handled
jugs, plates and bowls with a slightly flattened base. Footed beakers
also occur, but I am inclined to regard this form as one adopted from
the Totonac. The vases are usually covered with an even and highly
burnished red or yellow slip, on which are painted designs in a variety
of colours, red, yellow, white, grey and black (Pl. IX, 1, and Figs.
39 and 40). Geometrical and textile patterns are common, and also
figures and emblems of gods and men, animals and plants. The treatment
is often bold and free, and though at times the designs suffer from
over-conventionalization, they are always highly decorative. Relief
ornament is occasionally seen in the shape of animal heads (Fig. 40)
or small pierced handles, and the designs are sometimes furnished
with an engraved outline, though I believe both these features to be
characteristic rather of Totonac art. The legs of tripod bowls, which
are found in numbers, are usually moulded in the form of grotesque
faces, or the heads of birds, beasts and snakes. Peculiar to Tlaxcala
are interesting vases of black ware in the form of a Tlaloc face
or figure, the details of which are applied. The scroll-work which
constitutes a feature of the painted art bears a close analogy to the
Xochicalco designs, and it is not surprising to find similar pottery
in Oaxaca. It is quite true that Cholulan pottery may have found its
way in some quantity to the last-named region, by the great trade-route
which ran from Teotitlan to Oaxaca, but I am inclined to think that
much at least of it must have been manufactured locally, especially as
a certain form of tripod vase (Fig. 36, 4; p. 185) seems peculiar to
this country. Most remarkable of the finds in the Oaxaca district is
that of pottery designs which any archæologist unaware of their real
provenance would attribute unhesitatingly to the Peruvian coast. One of
these is illustrated in Fig. 41, and a glance will show how it differs
entirely from anything Mexican, and yet is absolutely identical with
one of the patterns most commonly found on the polychrome tapestries
of the Truxillo district of Peru. A peculiar class of Zapotec pottery
may be mentioned here, consisting of figure vases of coarse red-brown
or black ware, usually very brittle, found in tombs (Pl. XVII, 7–9).
These seem to have been made solely for funerary purposes, since the
figure element has been developed so as almost to eliminate the vase
portion. The figures are represented as sitting or standing; they wear
mantles with capes, and head-dresses in the form of a monster’s jaws
with feather plumes. Many of them are shown with a peculiar mouth-mask,
rather resembling the mouth-mask worn by the wind-god in Mexico and
Guatemala, and also by certain figures on vases from Nasca in Peru; and
occasionally the figure represents a bat. Many of them show traces of
red paint, and the faces are very skilfully modelled. On the whole they
are more Mayan than Mexican in appearance.

  [Illustration: FIG. 41.--Design on a vase from
  Cuicatlan, Oaxaca.

  (_After Seler_)]

From Monte Alban and Xoxo come pottery fragments of rather thick ware,
ornamented with broad red stripes on a red or yellow ground, somewhat
similar to certain fragments from Teotihuacan; and elsewhere in the
Zapotec country are found beakers with designs incised in outline
and the background cut away (Fig. 33, _b_; p. 176), similar in
technique, though not in art, to beakers from the island of Sacrificios
described below (e.g. Pl. XVIII, 10).

Quantities of pottery heads have been discovered in Cholula, similar to
those of Teotihuacan, though rather coarser in paste, and ornamented in
some cases with blue, red and white slip. Polychrome figurines in much
the same style have been found at Teotitlan del Camino.

To turn now to the Totonac region; the island of Sacrificios off Vera
Cruz has produced a store of pottery which is in no respect inferior to
that of Cholula with the exception that fewer colours are employed in
ornament and the surface is not highly burnished. The paste is either
pale red, grey or cream, admirably mixed and fired, and the shapes
exhibit considerable variety (Fig. 36, 5–9, and Pls. XVIII and XIX).
Especially characteristic are footed beakers and vases, tripod bowls
with cylindrical or cascabel feet containing rattles, standing-bowls,
bowls with slightly flattened bases, and plates. Handles are not
common, but a type of vase with single long projecting handle seems
confined to this area. Ornament is most commonly applied in the form of
slip, white, cream, red (more than one shade), yellow, brown and black.
In the most characteristic specimens the designs, monsters or formal
patterns, are painted in thick white slip, and usually outlined with
red or brown, or, especially in the case of plates, in deep orange on
a brown background or _vice versa_. Engraved ornament is far more
common in Totonac pottery than Cholulan; sometimes the engraving merely
follows the outline of a painted design, sometimes it constitutes the
sole ornament. In more elaborate specimens the entire background
is cut away, or an intaglio design produced which is filled with a
coloured slip. Fragments of the “champ-levé” ware, with its blue-green
filling, have also been found. Moulded ornament again is very common,
ranging from the mere gadrooning of a vase-body (Fig. 36, 5) to animal
heads in relief, with the other details painted in slip on the sides
of the vase (Pl. XIX). The vases with a bird’s (or beast’s) head in
relief, and the details of the body incised, as figured on Pl. XVIII,
2, are very characteristic, and are, further, of particular interest
since they, as well as vases in other forms, are often found to be
coated with a leaden-coloured glaze hard enough to resist the point
of a knife. This is of course an accidental earth-glaze, produced in
firing by the action of the smoke or heat on the surface of the slip.
Vases, identical in form and with the same accidental glaze, have
been found at Atlixco, and also in the neighbourhood of Coban in the
Alta Vera Paz district of Guatemala. It seems probable that they have
reached these localities as articles of trade. Many vase-feet also are
moulded in the form of animal heads (Pl. XIX).

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XVI_

    _British Museum_

  MEXICO

  1. STONE SACRIFICIAL KNIFE; WOODEN HANDLE ENCRUSTED WITH
  MOSAIC

  TOTONAC

  2–10. POTTERY FROM THE ISLAND OF SACRIFICIOS, VERA
  CRUZ

  (Scale: 1, ¼th; 2–10, ⅙th)]

Similar vase-feet are found at Tehuantepec, at Cuicatlan, at Teotitlan
and, as we have seen, at Cholula. Of these localities the first pair
seem to stand in close relation one to the other, and also the second
pair, from the fact that the Cholulan and Teotitlan vase-feet are most
commonly in the form of grotesque human heads, those of Cuicatlan and
Tehuantepec in the form of heads of snakes. However, the distinction is
by no means absolute. As far as the Totonac region is concerned, the
beast heads seem to be in the majority. Impressed patterns are found on
the bottoms of bowls from Sacrificios (Pl. XVIII, 9), but these form
regular designs, instead of being, as in Mexico, mere series of incised
lines. Similar bowls are found at Atlixco and at Cuicatlan, though
at the latter locality they are made in black ware. An interesting
characteristic of Totonac pottery ornamentation is seen in more or
less naturalistic painted designs, usually in yellow and brown slip,
representing animals, such as the Mexican porcupine, the coati,
monkeys, snakes, bats, lizards and insects. Quantities of fragments of
pottery figurines occur throughout the Totonac area. These are made
of a ware inferior to that of the vases, and though the treatment of
the bodies and limbs is apt to be clumsy, yet the faces are modelled
with considerable skill. Many of the details are applied, such as
head-dresses, sandal ties and the like; the teeth are often shown filed
to a point, or even mutilated in characteristic Maya fashion. The last
peculiarity emphasizes the general resemblance which these figurines
bear to those of British Honduras.

The pottery of the Totonac has been investigated carefully by
Strebel, who distinguishes several local types within the area. In
a general work of this nature it is impossible to deal at length
with minor variations, and it will be sufficient to state that the
careful investigations of this archæologist seem to indicate four
culture centres for the coastal region between the rivers Nautla and
Papaloapan. The two first are in the north, and close together, and are
associated respectively with sites at Cerro Montoso (E.N.E. of Jalapa,
near the coast) and Ranchito de las Animas (immediately N.E. of the
last). At the former of these the style is akin to and influenced by
the neighbouring highlands and the district beyond, while the latter
is probably more purely aboriginal. The two second lie to the south,
one including the Rio de Cotaxla, the other extending thence to the Rio
Papaloapan.

The pottery of the Huaxtec (Figs. 42–44) is peculiar from more than
one point of view. The paste of the most characteristic specimens is
hard and well-fired, of a pale cream colour, and the most typical
shape is a handled vase with a spout, rather like a teapot (Fig. 42),
with moulded and painted ornament, in red and black, on the body. The
latter is frequently in the form of an animal, with a large human face
modelled upon its back near the tail. Other vases in human shape, with
a spouted handle and similar painted decoration were also moulded from
this pale clay (Fig. 43). The presence of a spout distinguishes Huaxtec
pottery from Mexican, though an appendage of this nature is not unknown
from the Totonac country, since the tail of the animal vase figured on
Pl. XIX is pierced by a hole. Red pottery is also found in the Huaxtec
country, in the form of large vases and smaller tripod bowls, often
with engraved ornament on the outer surface. Grater-bowls, similar in
pattern to those of the Mexican valley, but in the pale cream ware, are
also found, together with many figurines and fragments of such which
are not mould-made.

  [Illustration: FIG. 42.--Huaxtec pottery vase;
  Tanquian.

  (_After Seler_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 43.--Huaxtec pottery vase;
  Panuco.

  (_After Seler_)]

To speak generally, the earliest type of pottery of which we have
cognizance is similar in type to that manufactured later by the
Tarascans. Following this came the far finer ware characteristic of
Teotihuacan, the product of the Toltec culture. In pottery-making the
mantle of the Toltec seems to have fallen upon the people of Cholula
and Tlaxcala, districts associated with them in legend, and upon the
Totonac, whose art shows certain affinities with that of Cholula.
Between the ware of the Cholula-Tlaxcala region and that of the
Mixtec-Zapotec district considerable similarity exists, a similarity
which extends to the decoration of the pyramid of Xochicalco. It is
usually held that the Cholulan style penetrated into Oaxaca _via_
Teotitlan, but I do not feel certain that the reverse may not be truer,
and that the real home of the highly-burnished polychrome ware may
not eventually be found to lie in Oaxaca. The form of ornament does
not seem to be a direct descendant of the Teotihuacan art, and there
are found in the Oaxaca region certain original forms, such as the
“Peruvian” designs mentioned above, as well as a tendency to elaborate
textile motives as ornament (for instance, the wall-mosaics of Mitla),
many of which motives constantly recur in the decoration of vases
in the “Cholula” style, while they are wanting on the Teotihuacan
pottery. However that may be, Teotitlan is a site of great importance,
constituting as it does a meeting-point of the three best schools of
pottery, Cholula, Oaxaca and Totonac. Further consideration of the
questions involved in the study of Mexican pottery must be deferred
until something has been said about the art and culture of the Maya.

  [Illustration: FIG. 44.--Huaxtec pottery vase;
  Tampico.

  (_After Seler_)]

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XIX_

    _British Museum_

  TOTONAC

  POTTERY FROM THE ISLAND OF SACRIFICIOS, VERA CRUZ

  (Scale: ¼th)]




                CHAPTER VIII--THE MAYA: TRIBAL HISTORY


Having sketched the archæology of Mexico proper, explained as far as
possible by what we know of the religion and customs of the early
inhabitants, it now remains to consider the region to the south and
east which was the scene of a distinct, but related, culture, that of
the Maya. The area involved consists of Tabasco, Chiapas, Campeche
and Yucatan in Mexico, British Honduras, Guatemala and the northern
portion of Honduras. The task is one of far greater difficulty, since
the ruined remains scattered over the country give evidence of a higher
culture than that which prevailed at the conquest; but of the people
who evolved that culture we know nothing except by implication. The
sites which show the greatest architectural and artistic development
had been abandoned at any rate some considerable time before the coming
of the Spaniards, and the early chroniclers were unable to record
anything concerning them. In Yucatan alone were traditions preserved
which could be brought into relation with the ancient buildings, and
then only with the most modern of them, which bear evident traces of
non-Maya influence. The area now under consideration is separated
geographically from that which formed the subject of the preceding
chapters by the Tehuantepec depression; to the east of the latter, the
southern section, including the greater portion of Tabasco, Chiapas,
Guatemala (except the extreme north), and Honduras, are part of a
mountain system which extends, with interruptions, into South America,
and may be considered a continuation of the Sierra Madre to the
west and north. Campeche, Yucatan and the part of Guatemala excepted
above, constitute a sort of annexe to the former, formed of limestone,
low-lying, and of comparatively recent elevation from below the sea.
Guatemala (including British Honduras) is an elevated plateau with its
highest and steepest escarpment on the Pacific side, and sloping less
abruptly and in irregular fashion towards the Atlantic. In the south
is a volcanic system, giving rise to scenery of particular beauty,
especially where it includes such highland lakes as that of Atitlan.
The igneous range constitutes the main watershed, and consequently the
only rivers of importance, the Usumacinta and Motagua, drain into the
Atlantic, while in the low-lying region of Peten a number of lakes are
found. In Honduras the mountain system decreases in elevation into
hilly country, also with its principal slope towards the Atlantic,
traversed in various directions by ridges branching off from the
central plateau. The volcanic system extends from Guatemala along the
Pacific coast. As in Mexico, climate corresponds with the degree of
elevation, and in Guatemala the same three zones, _tierra caliente_,
_tierra templada_ and _tierra fria_, are found, with similar abrupt
transitions from one to the other. In the lower country cacao, vanilla,
rubber, coconuts, bananas and palms grow freely, while the uplands are
covered with oak and pine. The Atlantic side of Honduras produces a
variety of valuable tropical timber, while the higher ground is on the
whole more open than that of Guatemala, much of the vegetation being
herbaceous and affording good grazing. The climate of Yucatan is purely
tropical, and the rainfall is very heavy. Under such conditions, more
favourable to vegetable than human existence, the country is thickly
covered with forest which reappears as soon as cleared and renders
exploration a matter of great difficulty, besides making the country
very unhealthy from the point of view of the European. Indeed, the
thick vegetation which clothes the river valleys and lower lying
parts of the whole Maya area is the principal obstacle in the way of
archæological investigation, since not only does it render the ruins
extremely difficult to locate, but it also contributes very seriously
to their decay. The fauna is rich, and includes birds of brilliant
plumage in great variety, jaguar, peccary, deer and alligator; the deer
and the turkey being the most important from the economic point of view
of the early native.

  [Illustration: FIG. 45.

    1. Aztec.
    2. Pipil.
    3. Chontal.
    4. Zotzil.
    5. Tzental.
    6. Chol.
    7. Chanabal.
    8. Chicomaceltec.
    10. Cuje.
    11. Jacaltec.
    12. Mam.
    13. Ixil.
    14. Aguacatec.
    15. Quiché.
    16. Kakchiquel.
    17. Tzutuhil.
    18. Uspantec.
    19. Kekchi.
    20. Pokonchi.
    21. Pokomam.
    22. Chorti.
    23. Maya.
    24. Zoque.
    25. Tapachula.

(1 and 2, Nahuatl; 3–23, Maya; 24 and 25, Zoquean.)]

Practically the whole of the population of this area, with the
exception of an enclave of Nahua-speakers in southern Guatemala, spoke
dialects of the language known as Maya in the broadest sense, to which
the tongues of the Huaxtec and Totonac also belonged. The distribution
of the various tribes is best seen from the accompanying map, after
Thomas (Fig. 45), but it is hardly necessary to discuss them in detail,
since their present positions cannot be taken necessarily as affording
any indication of their positions in pre-Spanish times, and from only
a very few have legends been collected which shed any light upon their
former history. The dialect spoken in Yucatan is known as Maya in the
narrower sense, and seems to bear a nearer relation to that which
prevailed among the nations of the older culture, since the Yucatec at
the conquest were using a script which corresponded closely with that
found upon the monuments. Their dialect extends to the Rio de la Pasion
and the western and southern Usumacinta, where it is spoken by the
so-called Lacandons who have preserved certain of the ancient customs
and beliefs. The Lacandons to the west speak the Chol dialect, though
there are indications that both divisions of this people originally
spoke Maya, that is to say the dialect of Yucatan. Besides the Yucatec,
practically the only tribes of historical importance are grouped around
lake Atitlan; the Quiché occupying the largest area to the north, south
and west of the lake, extending from the Pacific to central Guatemala,
the Kakchiquel to the west and south of the lake, also extending to
the Pacific, and the Tzutuhil wedged in between them on the southern
shore of Atitlan. South-east of the Kakchiquel are the Pipil, a
Nahua-speaking tribe, and Nahua dialects are found in San Salvador
and even further to the south-east, as far as Nicaragua and Panama,
pointing to a stream of Nahua migration by an overland route. The Pipil
themselves preserved a tradition that they had reached their present
abode from Tuxtla. The Maya language as a whole exhibits certain points
of similarity to that of the Mixtec and Zapotec, but its structure is
more akin to that spoken on the islands of the Mexican Gulf and the
northern coast of South America. A tradition existed in Yucatan that
an early section of the inhabitants had come from the east, and the
Maya of this neighbourhood were certainly good seamen, since large
canoes with sails were met by the expedition of Columbus, so it is at
least possible that a section of the early population were immigrants
from the Antilles. But at present too little is known of the languages
of Central America to admit of the formulation of definite theories
based upon linguistic arguments, which constitute a class of evidence
requiring extreme caution on the part of those who would make use of it.

The early history of the Maya tribes is by no means easy to extract
from the traditions which have survived until the present day.
The chief sources of information are as follows. The traditions
relating to the Tutul-Xiu family, the centre of whose power at the
time of the conquest lay at Mani in Yucatan, which were reduced to
writing, under the name of the “Books of Chilan Balam” (Chilan Balam
meaning Tiger-priest) in Spanish times. The legends of the Quiché,
who in historical times occupied the plateau around Santa Cruz and
Quetzaltanango, with their capital at Utatlan, contained in the Popol
Vuh. The “Annals” of the Xahila family of the Kakchiquel tribe, whose
chief city was Iximché near the modern Tecpan Guatemala. Finally the
scattered traditions collected from the natives by such early writers
as Landa and Cogolludo. The Yucatec traditions alone can be brought
into any direct connection with the ruined sites of the early and
architecturally more advanced Maya culture, but all of them agree in
fixing Tulan as the starting-point of their respective migrations.
Again the Books of Chilan Balam are the only traditions which are
accompanied throughout by definite dates, according to a system which
is explained later, and these dates can be correlated with our own
time owing to the fact that each version fixes with great precision
the death of a certain Ahpula, which occurred in 1536. Unfortunately
the different versions do not agree as to the earlier dates, and in
some cases extended time-periods appear to have been interpolated.
I think however by careful comparison it is possible to reduce the
discrepancies to a minimum, and I have therefore drawn up a scheme of
chronology, based in the main on the version current at Mani, for which
some degree of accuracy may, I think, be claimed. I do not pretend that
these dates are more than tentative, but they will at least serve as
a frame-work into which the main facts of Maya history may be fitted
(Appendix III). The tradition current in Yucatan at the time of Landa
was that the country had been peopled by two sets of immigrants, one
from the east under a god or high-priest Itzamna, the other from the
west under Kukulkan (the Maya equivalent of Quetzalcoatl), who later
departed westward in the direction of Mexico. The first immigrants
are said to have built Chichen Itza, and Kukulkan is related to have
ruled there for a time, though afterwards his votaries built the city
of Mayapan, where he reigned as a sort of overlord of the Yucatec.
According to this author the Tutul-Xiu entered Yucatan from the south,
and joined the Mayapan confederacy. To judge from their own legend the
Tutul-Xiu left their original abode, Nonoual in Tulan Zuiva, about the
year 418 A.D. (though it is possible that this event may have
occurred earlier, viz. in 161, but I think the evidence is in favour
of the later dating). Their leader was Holon Chantepeuh, and their
first settlement was at Chacnouitan, and subsequently, under Ahmekat
Tutul-Xiu, at Balcalar. Whilst there, they heard of Chichen Itza, and
later removed to this site, about the year 496. The fact that they
are stated to have heard of Chichen Itza while they were at Balcalar
seems to prove that some settlement already existed at the former
place, and one version of the tradition represents them as setting out
in search of it. For over a century they resided at Chichen Itza, and
then removed to Champoton, probably owing to difficulties with their
neighbours, since it is stated that Chichen was “destroyed.” Their
stay at Champoton is estimated at about two centuries and a half, at
the end of which period they wandered back to Chichen Itza and again
established themselves there. Not long afterwards Uxmal was “founded”
by one of the Xiu family, Ahzuitok Tutul-Xiu, about 989, and the famous
“league” of Mayapan was formed. For some time, about two hundred years,
a central government was maintained at Mayapan, the city associated
so closely with Kukulkan, and no doubt the paramount chieftains were
satisfied with little more than the bare recognition of suzerainty.
But the centrifugal action so noticeable in the political history of
the American peoples began to assert itself, the league split up and
Mayapan fell. The exact circumstances which led to the downfall of the
paramount city are obscure. The family of the Cocomes were the rulers
of Mayapan at the time, and it would appear that they had begun to
exercise a closer control over their vassals. To support the harsher
methods which they introduced they commenced to employ the services of
mercenaries, “Mexicans,” recruited in Tabasco and Xicalanco, and by
their aid levied tribute upon the other members of the league to an
extent which the latter were not prepared to suffer. The accounts of
the Books of Chilan Balam are obscure, but they agree in the names
of the personages who played the principal parts in the events which
followed. Chac-Xib-Chac was the “Governor” of Chichen Itza, and it
would appear that he conspired against the ruler of Mayapan, Hunac
Ceel, who drove him out, according to the, no doubt, partisan account
of the Xiu house, by “treachery.” This treachery probably implies the
employment of the foreign mercenaries mentioned above, since Hunac
Ceel’s agents are called the “seven men of Mayapan,” and their names,
which are recorded, are Nahua rather than Maya. Ulil, the ruler of
Itzamal, also appears to have been implicated in the conspiracy against
the ruling house. But whatever was the exact course of events, the
net result was that Chichen Itza was depopulated about the year 1187;
meanwhile the Nahua mercenaries had influenced the ethnography of the
country by the introduction of the bow as a weapon. But the end was
not yet, the people of Chichen Itza nursed their revenge, and about a
century later instigated a general rising which resulted in the sack of
Mayapan and the slaughter of the ruler and all his sons except one, who
was at the time absent in the Uloa valley. The survivor on his return
collected the remnants of the Cocomes and settled at Sotuta, the Xiu
faction retiring to Mani. The Mexican mercenaries, who no doubt formed
too formidable a section to be attacked directly, were allowed to
form a settlement at Ahcanul, north-east of Campeche. Itzamal however
survived; a noble of high rank, Ahchel, who had married the daughter
of a high-priest of Mayapan, took up his residence at Tikoch near
the coast, with his numerous sons. The family increased in numbers
and importance, and later constituted a ruling house, known as the
Chel, with its capital at Itzamal. Subsequent history relates various
struggles between the Xiu, Cocomes and Chel, the Cocomes preventing
the Chel from obtaining game and cereals from the interior, and the
Chel refusing salt and fish to the Cocomes. But in spite of this the
population at large was prosperous, and increased in numbers, until a
severe hurricane wrought much damage throughout the land, chiefly by
causing the thatched roofs of the houses to catch fire. This disaster
was followed by a plague, and then a series of sanguinary wars, after
which smallpox appeared. Finally the Xiu, wishing to perform certain
ceremonies at their old home, Chichen Itza, asked for a passage through
the territory of the Cocomes. This was granted, but the party was
enticed into a building which was set on fire and the inmates were
massacred. Meanwhile the Spaniards had appeared in the country, and
native history had reached its close.

The history of the Quiché exhibits some connection with that of the
Kakchiquel, and further displays certain points of resemblance with the
early legends of the Mexicans. Though both the Quiché and Kakchiquel
accounts give lists of kings who ruled over their respective tribes,
yet they furnish no dates, and the lengths of the various reigns can
only be conjectured. Quiché history, like the Mexican, begins in myth,
with the final or historical creation. The creating-gods fashioned four
men out of maize, Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Agab, Mahucutah and Iqi-Balam. Of
these the first three were the ancestors of the three Quiché divisions,
the Cavek, Nihaib and Ahau-Quiché respectively. The fourth had no
descendants, and therefore no place in the later history. We are told
that besides these four individuals, the “Yaqui” or “sacrificers”
(a name given in later times to the Mexicans) existed in numbers,
and further the ancestors of various other tribes to the east (of
the original Quiché home) were created, including the Tepeuh Oloman
(probably the Olmec), the Tamub and Ilocab (the early inhabitants of
the country later occupied by the Quiché), the seven tribes of Tecpan
(perhaps the Pokomam and Pokonchi), the Kakchiquel, the Rabinal
(later at Zamaneb), the Tziquinaha (of Atitlan), and others. The four
Quiché ancestors however were too perfect to please the gods, being
omniscient, so the latter dimmed their intellects, but, as some sort of
compensation, provided them with wives. The sun as yet was not created,
all the world was dark, and mankind had no knowledge of ritual. So they
set out for Tulan Zuiva, where each tribe received its god under whose
leadership it commenced its migration. Before the general separation
however the need of fire was felt, and the Quiché god, Tohil, who
was a thunder-god, provided his votaries with a constant supply, by
striking it from his sandal. The other tribes begged fire from the
Quiché, but they, on the advice of a messenger in bat-form from the
underworld, Xibalba, demanded in return that the recipients should
consent to be united with their god “beneath their girdles and beneath
their armpits.” This dark saying implied the gift of their hearts in
sacrifice, and the other tribes, failing to understand the true import,
fell into the trap, with the exception of the Kakchiquel, whose bat-god
stole fire from the smoke without agreeing to the terms. The migrations
then took place, many of the tribes going eastward, while the Quiché,
together with the Kakchiquel, Tamub, Ilocab, Rabinal and Tziquinaha,
travelled to Guatemala, where on a mountain they assumed their tribal
names and “awaited the dawn, looking for the morning star.” The phrase
recalls very distinctly the Mexican legend related on p. 10. Finally
the morning star made its appearance, followed by the sun, to which
incense brought from Tulan was offered, but the tribal gods, who had
meanwhile expressed the wish to be secluded in sanctuaries apart
from the settlements of men, were turned into stone. After this the
four Quiché leaders withdrew themselves from association with their
followers, but were occasionally seen, together with the gods, in the
mountains and forests; human sacrifice, practised secretly, began
to make its appearance, and strife with the other tribes arose. The
operations of the hostile tribes seem to have been directed chiefly
towards the capture of the Quiché gods, and after the failure of
various stratagems, a direct attack was made upon the Quiché, now
living in a palisaded settlement in the mountains, but was repulsed
with great slaughter. The death of the original leaders next follows
in the legend; they summon the people, sing the song with which they
greeted the sun on its first rising and then disappear, leaving behind
a bundle afterwards known as “veiled majesty.” The song opens, “The
king of the deer is ready; his sign appears in the sky,” and the words
suggest the stellar god of the Mexican hunting-tribes, Mixcoatl, with
his two-headed deer, while the “medicine-bundle” is not unknown to
Mexican mythology (see pp. 33 and 55).

The greater portion of the account given at present must of course be
regarded as belonging to the region of myth, but at this point the
narrative becomes more “historical” in nature. The Popol Vuh naturally
exalts the Quiché at the expense of the other tribes, but it appears
from other sources that they did actually exercise a certain, though
variable, supremacy over their neighbours. Hitherto they had obviously
been under a priestly domination, and the leaders of the migration
wielded an authority arising from their association with the gods
which they received at Tulan. But their sons had no such right to
command, and so set out on a pilgrimage to the related tribes in the
east, i.e. those who had taken a more easterly route, to obtain the
_insignia_ of temporal rule. On their return the Quiché began
to expand, stone-built cities were constructed to be the centres of
ceremonial and political life of the three tribal divisions, the
government was organized, and though the Ilocab revolted against the
growing Quiché power, they were subdued and the attempt only had
the effect of inaugurating the public sacrifice of prisoners. It is
interesting to note that one of their early kings, whose name Gukumatz
is the equivalent of the Nahua Quetzalcoatl, is credited with the
performance of many miraculous feats; but the first kings important
from a historical point of view were Quicab and Cavizimah. Under them
the Kakchiquel and Rabinal were conquered, colonies and garrisons
were placed in subject towns and, on their own account, continued to
extend the Quiché power by conquest, though many of the leaders broke
away from the main stock and set up as independent chieftains. In this
reign we first hear of prisoners of war being executed by the shooting
sacrifice as practised by the Mexicans. Quicab appears to have been by
far the most important of the Quiché rulers, but the power which he
gained was not maintained even throughout his reign. For the events
which commenced the decline of the Quiché domination we must go to the
annals of the Kakchiquel, in which it is stated that two of Quicab’s
sons, who no doubt occupied the position of sub-chiefs, took advantage
of certain discontent among his subjects to refuse the tribute due to
their father and overlord. The sedition seems to have succeeded to the
extent that Quicab’s authority was considerably weakened, and it was
followed by a more serious defection in the form of a revolt on the
part of the Kakchiquel as related below. None of Quicab’s successors
wielded the power which he exercised in his most prosperous years, and
at the time of the conquest the Kakchiquel, Tzutuhil and other tribes
had regained their independence.

In the Kakchiquel annals we find again a list of kings, though five
fewer than the corresponding list of Quiché chiefs, but dates are
for the most part lacking, though the revolt of a sub-tribe in the
reign of the sixth ruler can be fixed as the starting-point of the
chronological system current at the discovery. Again we find Tulan
mentioned as the point of departure, but the statement is made that
there are four Tulans, one in the east, one in the west (whence the
Kakchiquel themselves came), one at Xibalba (the underworld) and one
“where god is.” It is impossible not to see in this a reference to the
four cardinal points, which, as has been pointed out, were of such
ceremonial importance among the Mexicans. The names of the ancestors
of the Xahila division of the Kakchiquel are given as Gagavitz and
Zactecauh, and after the creation they brought tribute to Tulan
together with the Zotzil, the other division, consisting of jade,
silver, feather-work and carvings. All that they brought away with them
were their arms, bows and shields, and throughout the early portion of
the annals insistence is continually being made on the fact that the
Kakchiquel were warriors of the hills. “Let your rounded shields be
your riches, your bows, your bucklers ... there in the hills shall you
lift up your faces.” Various other tribes are mentioned as starting
from Tulan about the same time, including the Rabinal, Tzutuhil, and
Tukuchi, the last becoming subject subsequently to the Kakchiquel. A
number of place-names occur in the account of the migration, which do
not admit of identification, and at one point the sea is said to have
been crossed by means of a causeway of sand which miraculously made
its appearance. Finally the travellers come to Tapcu Oloman, where
they fought with those of Nonoualcat, who come against them in boats,
a statement which must surely point to the Olmec and the region east
of the Totonac (between the rivers Papaloapan and Usumacinta) known
to the Mexicans as Nonoualco. Whilst here they made an attack upon
Zuiva, but were defeated. At this point the wandering peoples, who
included the Quiché, adopted tribal names, and they then retraced their
footsteps over the route by which they had come, fighting with various
tribes by the way, until apparently they turned south and arrived in
Guatemala. During the journey Zactecauh fell into a ravine and was
killed, but Gagavitz, whose influence hitherto seems to have been
purely priestly, like that of other leaders of migration, was invested
with the _insignia_ of temporal power and became chief of the
Xahila and Zotzil divisions. At this time the tribes were evidently in
a neighbourhood which was the scene of considerable volcanic activity,
and in one of their wars they captured the ruler of a hostile tribe,
by name Tolgom (“Son of the Mud-that-Quivers”), and executed him
with arrows. In commemoration of this episode an annual festival was
instituted at which children were offered up in an arrow-sacrifice.
The tribes then settled, dividing the land amongst themselves, and
since Gagavitz remained with the Tzutuhil, the Kakchiquel were left
without a chief, and a man named Baquahol succeeded in obtaining the
power, apparently by purchase or bribery. Here again the Kakchiquel
account is brought into relation with other migration legends, since it
is stated that the “dawn” appeared. The actual words used are rather
interesting, and they are quoted in full later on. Though Baquahol had
obtained the power, yet Gagavitz was not without descendants, and his
two sons Cay Noh and Cay Batz took service with a chief named Tepeuh,
“king of Kauke, to whom all paid tribute.” It has been conjectured with
some reason that this ruler is to be identified with the Quiché chief
Iztayul, but in any case he appears to have been an overlord of the
whole district, and sufficiently powerful to place Cay Noh and Cay Batz
as rulers over the Kakchiquel. Cay Noh was succeeded by his son Citan
Quatu, but the son of the latter did not rule; in fact for the time the
power appears to have been divided among a number of petty chieftains.
However, the tribes were again united by Huntoh and Vukubatz, the
former being the grandson of Citan Quatu, though the Kakchiquel had not
yet attained complete independence, since they recognized the Quiché
ruler, now Quicab, as their overlord. But freedom was in sight, and an
opportunity was offered by the troubles which marred the final years of
Quicab’s reign. The actual excuse of the Kakchiquel revolt was slender
enough, a woman selling bread had her wares seized by certain Quiché
soldiers, and the Kakchiquel espoused her cause. Quicab appears to have
failed to recognize the real nature of the movement, and neglected
to take immediate steps to suppress it, with the result that the
Kakchiquel were able to declare their independence and now appear as a
rival power. Hostilities between the peoples continue, and finally the
Kakchiquel under Cablahuh Tihax and Oxlahuh Tzii defeat the Quiché in a
pitched battle, capturing their joint rulers Tepepul and Iztayul, who
have meanwhile succeeded Quicab.[4] The description of the battle is
given in part on p. 292. The power of the Kakchiquel now appears at its
zenith, but their expansion aroused the jealousy of their neighbours.
A revolt occurred of the Tukuchi subject tribe, which was however
suppressed, and with such slaughter that the incident became a landmark
in history. From this point in the annals the number of days which
elapsed subsequent to the revolt is given, with the result that the
revolt itself can be attributed almost with certainty to the year 1494.
The rest of the history until the arrival of the Spaniards consists
in accounts of fights with neighbours, which the annals usually
characterize as the suppression of revolts. Two items of information
however are of importance. Before the death of Oxlahuh Tzii, which
occurred in 1509 or 1510, we read that certain “Yaqui” (i.e. Mexican
traders) were put to death for siding with the revolted Akahal, while
in 1511 messengers were received by Hunyg and Lahun Noh, then ruling,
from Montecuzoma.

It is perhaps impossible in the present state of our knowledge to
unravel the myths given above sufficiently to determine with accuracy
the routes taken by the different tribes, but still the general trend
of migrations may perhaps be gathered from them. The place-name
Nonoual, which occurs both in the books of Chilan Balam and the annals
of the Kakchiquel, is valuable as a fixed point, since it seems
possible to determine the locality with reasonable certainty. The
Kakchiquel obviously reached Nonoual from the west, and then retraced
their steps before turning southward into Guatemala; thus they always
regarded Nonoual as lying in the east. For the Tutul Xiu however it
lay in the west, and this people had settled at Balcalar in southern
Yucatan before they moved north to Chichen Itza. If we add to this
the information found in the Kakchiquel annals that the inhabitants
lived in boats, the conclusion seems inevitable that Nonoual lay
somewhere on the coast between the lower reaches of the Papaloapan
and of the Usumacinta. This agrees absolutely with the site of the
region known to the Mexicans as Nonoualco, and the “sea” crossed by
the Quiché and Kakchiquel before they arrived there may be one of the
lagoons of the Papaloapan basin. The name of Tulan, the starting-point
of the migrations, affords greater difficulties. Tulan is usually
mentioned with the addition of the name Zuiva, and the Popol Vuh gives
it a further title which means the “seven caverns,” and so brings it
into direct relation with the Chicomoztoc at which the various Nahua
tribes foregathered before they descended upon the Mexican valley
(see p. 14). For the Kakchiquel, Tulan was also the starting-point,
but Zuiva lay beyond Nonoual, and evidently not far from it; and this
agrees with the Books of Chilan Balam, since in the latter Nonoual
appears to be a district of the realm known as Tulan Zuiva. A further
point in confirmation of this may perhaps be extracted from the fact
that certain tribes called Tepeu Oliman (Popol Vuh), or Tapcu Oloman
(Kakchiquel annals), are associated with this particular region, while
the inhabitants of the latter were known to the Mexicans as Olmec.
Tulan, the starting-point therefore, cannot be identified with the
Zuiva, or Tulan Zuiva near Nonoual, nor indeed is there any need that
such an identification should be made. The original Tulan, wherever it
lay, was regarded evidently as the home of a large number of peoples,
and there is a tendency, visible all over the world, for migrating
tribes to name their subsequent settlements after their original or
legendary birthplace. Perhaps the best example of this propensity is
presented by the number of Hawaikis scattered over the Pacific, Hawaiki
being the name of the original starting-point of Polynesian migrations.
That this Tulan Zuiva near Nonoual was an important kingdom in the
youth of the Quiché and Kakchiquel peoples is obvious; the Kakchiquel
admit defeat at the hands of its inhabitants, and though it is not
expressly so stated, the account of the Popol Vuh seems to indicate
that the _insignia_ of temporal power were obtained from the ruler
of this district, a chief named Nacxit. The name Nacxit is interesting,
since Tezozomoc states that it was an appellation of Quetzalcoatl, and
we have already observed the importance which the Mexican immigrants
attached to Toltec blood as giving the possessor the right to reign,
Tulan being closely associated with this god. That there were more
Tulans than one seems evident from the Kakchiquel statement that
there were four, although the number quoted appears to have a certain
ceremonial reference to the points of the compass. That the Quiché and
Kakchiquel had come in contact with the later Nahua immigrants into the
Mexican valley seems evident both from certain points of similarity
in their migration legends, and also from the highly important fact
that they used the bow, a weapon which was unknown to the Tutul Xiu
until a later date. From these considerations, and also from the
evidence afforded by the short list of kings which the legends of these
tribes furnish, one feels inclined to regard the Tulan from which they
started as the region ruled by the Toltec of the Mexican valley, and
to conjecture that the Tulan Zuiva with which Nonoual was connected,
was perhaps one of the now ruined sites in the Usumacinta basin. The
association of the word Zuiva with the original Tulan in the Quiché
account may be due to one of two causes. It may on the one hand be the
result of confusion, or on the other it is possible that “Tulan” and
“Zuiva” may be the same name but belong to different dialects. The
question which Tulan gave the name to the other is more complex, and
can only be decided after the date of these ruins has been discussed,
but it may be mentioned that there is nothing inherently impossible in
the suggestion that one of the Usumacinta sites may have been named
Tulan, for we do not know the original names of any of them. The net
result of a comparison of the migration legends which we possess is
therefore as follows. The Quiché and Kakchiquel appear to have been
closely connected throughout, and the Tutul Xiu show little trace
of connection with either. The former two tribes seem to have been
brought into contact with the later Nahua, while the Tutul Xiu were
not, and the Tulan from which the Tutul Xiu migration started was not
the Tulan which the Quiché and Kakchiquel regarded as their original
home, though it is possible that the two were intimately connected. The
first stage of Quiché and Kakchiquel migration seems to have been from
west to east, through those districts which, from Tuxpan to Tabasco,
were regarded as the daughter-states of the Mexican Tulan, and their
route, or at any rate some portion of it, lay along the coast. After
this they retraced their steps for a short distance, and then turned
south and west into Guatemala, probably passing through south-western
Vera Cruz, western Oaxaca, and Chiapas. Further consideration of this
complicated question must be deferred until some account has been given
of the religion, ethnography, and ruined sites of the Maya area.




                CHAPTER IX--THE MAYA: RELIGION AND MYTH


As among the Mexicans, so too among the Maya, any attempt to
reconstruct their civilization must start with a general survey of
their religious beliefs. The task of dealing shortly and clearly with
this subject is by no means easy; from the one point of view indeed
it is simpler, since the amount of information at the disposal of
students is relatively small; but on the other hand, as far as the
builders of the ruins are concerned, we are dealing with a people who
had had their day at the time of the conquest, and the meaning of the
scenes sculptured on the monuments must be inferred from the religious
practices of a people who, though no doubt ethnically and culturally
their descendants, had been exposed to influences emanating from
Mexico, and had declined in civilization. The different sources of
information, moreover, must be kept distinctly apart; such authorities
as Landa and Cogolludo deal only with the Maya of Yucatan as they found
them; the native traditions called the “Books of Chilan Balam” give a
few mythical details relating to one Yucatec tribe, and that not the
earliest of the Maya immigrants; while other native chroniclers, the
Popol Vuh and Annals of Xahila, relate to the Quiché and Kakchiquel
respectively, also comparatively late immigrants, who had fallen under
Mexican influence. The native codices give a large number of portraits
of beings which, it is safe to conclude, were gods, and these,
especially the manuscript known as Troano-Cortesianus, constitute a
most important link between the early Maya sculptures and the accounts
of the Yucatec by Landa and Cogolludo; but the identification of the
different deities is to a large extent a conjectural matter, impossible
of short treatment since it involves the production of much detailed
evidence. The following account does not pretend to be more than the
result of a careful consideration of most of the sources, and for the
evidence itself the reader must be referred elsewhere. It cannot be
denied that many of the conclusions here set forth are controversial,
but it may be claimed that there do exist in all cases certain definite
points of evidence in their favour. Mayan religion shows a close
fundamental similarity to that of the Mexicans, so much so in fact that
it is fair to argue from what we know of the latter to the former,
always with proper precautions. Care is necessary, since the migration
legends of the Quiché, Kakchiquel and books of Chilan Balam all mention
Tulan as a resting-place or starting-point, and there is always the
possibility that the myths contained in them may have been influenced
by “Toltec” beliefs. I hope to show later, however, that the basis of
the Toltec culture was in fact Mayan, and I therefore think it fair to
claim that many, though certainly not all, of the similarities between
the two religions are due to a common Mayan element. This is especially
true of what we are able to conjecture concerning the beliefs of the
builders of the ruins in Honduras, Guatemala and Chiapas.

As among the Mexicans, tribal gods, under whose leadership migrations
took place, are found also among the Maya. In Yucatan we hear of a
god Itzamna, supposed to have come from the east, whose attributes
are much the same as those of Tonacatecutli. Connected with the sites
of Chichen Itza and Mayapan was the god Kukulkan, of whose name
“Quetzalcoatl” is a literal translation, and who was supposed to have
come from the west. The god of the Quiché was Tohil, and he was in
particular the deity of the Cavek tribe and a thunder-god, while the
other principal divisions of the Quiché, the Nihaib and Ahau-Quiché,
were under the leadership of Avilix and Hacavitz respectively. A
fourth tribal division worshipped a god Nicatayah, but just as the
ultimate prosperity of the Aztec raised their deity Uitzilopochtli to
a predominating position in the pantheon, so the extinction of this
Quiché division resulted in the extinction also of its god. Tohil is
in one place definitely identified with Quetzalcoatl, under the name
Yolcual Quetzalcuat (i.e. Yoalli Eecatl Quetzalcoatl). The god of the
Rabinal was Huntoh, who is probably identical with Tohil. The god of
the Kakchiquel was a divinity in bat-form, called Zotziha Chimalcan,
and was a deity associated by the Quiché with the underworld, Xibalba.
Gods especially associated with certain localities were, Kukulkan
with Mayapan and, later, Mani, Ahchun Caan with Tihoo, Ahulneb with
Cozumel, Kinich Ahau with Campeche, and Itzamatul (perhaps a form of
Itzamna) with Itzamal. The Tzental of Chiapas and Tabasco venerated
a culture-hero Votan. But in actual cult, at any rate as far as the
Yucatec were concerned, the agricultural divinities were of primary
importance. As in Mexico, the god of agriculture and rain was also
the thunder-god; in Yucatan he was called Chac, and was assisted in
the performance of his functions by a number of subsidiary Chac,
just as Tlaloc by the Tlaloque. Another fertility-god was Ah Bolon
Tzacab, who, in one creation myth, is represented as taking the seeds
of all cultivated plants with him to the thirteenth heaven, a story
which recalls the theft of maize by Tlaloc (p. 48). Other patrons of
agriculture were the so-called Bacab, the four deities placed by the
creator to support the heavens. Their names were Hobnil, Kanzicnal,
Zaczini and Hozanek, and they are closely associated with the Chac, so
closely in fact that I am inclined to think that they were actually
four of the latter deities. Like the Mexican Tlaloc, the Chac were
supposed to carry axes, the weapon of the thunder-god, and were
closely associated with the snake which throughout America is the
symbol of rain. They have been identified, I think beyond doubt, with
the figure, called by Schellhas “God B,” of the manuscripts, a god
who appears constantly on the monuments throughout the Maya region
(Fig. 46, _e_). Like Tlaloc he is shown with a long nose and
tusks, the former of which on the buildings of Yucatan develops into
a regular trunk. Seler identifies Ah Bolon Tzacab with the “God K” of
Schellhas, a god with a foliated nose, who is closely associated with
Chac, and appears nearly as often on the monuments (Fig. 46, _b_).
God K however bears a striking resemblance to the Zapotec funerary
figures with their peculiar elongated mouth-masks, and also to the
Mexican Eecatl, a form of Quetzalcoatl. I think therefore that he is
more likely a god of wind, a deity who would necessarily be closely
connected with the rain- and thunder-gods. But though he may be the
Maya parallel of Quetzalcoatl in the form of Eecatl, I do not think
that he is to be identified with Kukulkan. This statement may not seem
to follow from what I have said before, but I hope to make it clear
later. Among the Quiché we have Kanel (or Xkanel), Xcacau, and Xtoh as
gods of fertility, and among the Kakchiquel, Kanel also. It is further
to be noted that another name of Hobnil is Kanal Bacab. Hunting- and
fishing-gods existed among the Yucatec, but nothing is known of them
save their names; the hunting-deities were Akanum, Zuhuyzip, and Tabai,
the fishing, Ahcitz, Ahkak Nexoi, Ahpua and Amalcum. As gods of the
arts we have Itzamna, the supposed inventor of letters, Ixchebelyax,
goddess of embroidery and painting, a Maya counterpart of Xochiquetzal,
Ixazalvoh, goddess of weaving, Pizlimtec and Xochbitum, gods of singing
(like Xochipilli and Macuilxochitl), and Htubhtum a god of gems.
There appear to have been four war-deities, Hunpiktok, Ahchuykak,
Citchac Coh, and Ahulneb, while the Tzental war-god was called Chinax.
Hunpiktok, who had a temple at Itzamal, is identified with Tihax of
the Quiché and Kakchiquel, the god of the stone knife, and both were
probably sacrificial-deities also. One of these war-gods may be the
God F of the manuscripts, who appears to bear a certain relation to
the death-god and to sacrifice, and whose face-paint is not unlike
that of the Aztec Xipe (Fig. 46, _f_). Like the Mexicans the Maya
possessed a god of travellers and traders, Ekchuah, who corresponds to
the Mexican Yacatecutli, though he does not seem to have been honoured
with so elaborate a cult. Gods of medicine (closely allied with magic)
were Itzamna, Citbolontum, Ahau Chamahez and a sun-god, Kinich Ahau,
husband of Ixazalvoh. Kukulkan, according to one account, was the god
of fevers, and with these deities was associated Ixchel, the goddess
of childbirth, wife of Itzamna, whose image was placed under the bed
of prospective mothers in order to secure an easy delivery. There was
also a goddess Zuhuykak, said to be a deified mortal, who was the
special protectress of children. The Quiché venerated a number of
disease-gods, connected with whom were the two deities Xpiyakok and
Xmukane, counterparts of the Mexican Oxomoco and Cipactonal, who, like
the latter, were supposed to have assisted in the creation and were
regarded as the prototypes of all magicians.

  [Illustration: FIG. 46.--Maya gods with their
  name-glyphs.

    A. The Moan bird.
    B. The wind-god (God K).
    C. Unknown goddess.
    D. The maize-god (God E).
    E. The rain- and thunder-god (God B).
    F. The war-god (God F).

  (_Dresden MS._)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 47.--Maya gods with their
  name-glyphs.

    A. A water-goddess (Goddess I).
    B. The sun-god (God G).
    C. The god of the north star (God C).
    D. The sky-god (God D).
    E. The death-god (God A).
    F. The goddess of suicides.

  (_Dresden MS._)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 48.--The serpent-bird, from a
  carved wooden panel at Tikal.

  (_After Maudslay_)]

We come now to the elemental gods, who seem for the most part to have
been rather vague personalities, crystallized here and there (and
rather robbed of dignity in the process) into more sharply defined
tribal protectors. These are the deities whom, I believe, the builders
of the monuments chiefly worshipped, and whose portraits or symbols
may be identified among the carvings which decorate the ruins. Among
these, the most difficult to treat satisfactorily is Kukulkan,
the Quiché Gukumatz. The name, as stated before in connection with
Quetzalcoatl, means “Feathered serpent,” and the conception of such
a divinity is not peculiar to the Maya region, since a feathered
snake, the “Mother of waters,” is worshipped by the Pueblo Indians
far to the north. But Gukumatz-Kukulkan is not a mere water-god, and
I think that his real nature is apparent from the Tzental description
of Kukulkan, “the feathered snake that goes in the waters.” It is
difficult to see what else this can typify than the ripple, born both
of wind and water, the aspect of which suggests feathers, and the
motion a serpent. Both as representing motion, i.e. primordial motion,
and as typifying wind, i.e. breath, the god represents life, and so
in his highest aspect becomes a creator-god. In his snake and water
aspect he is closely connected with the rain-gods, while in his bird
and wind manifestation he is lord of the sky and world-directions,
for the winds blow from all points of the compass. As this great and
vague deity he appears in the early part of the Popol Vuh, and also, I
believe, on the monuments, where his symbol, the serpent-bird, is not
uncommon (e.g. Figs. 48 and 49). But he is not directly represented,
for the very reason that primitive peoples (and civilized too for
that matter) shrink from expressing their high gods in definite form.
It is only when he becomes a tribal protector, as among the Toltec
and the rulers of Mayapan, that his attributes become fixed and a
definite conception of him is transferred to wood or stone. But once
the definite conception is formed, the majesty of mystery is to a large
extent lost, and we see in Mexico the god of life and breath becoming
Eecatl, the god of the material wind, who sweeps the path of the gods
of rain. It is this relation, I believe, that Kukulkan-Gukumatz bears
to the Maya god of the material wind, God K. No one who has studied the
beliefs of the American tribes will think that such a conception is
beyond their psychology. Francisco Hernandez states that the Yucatec
chiefs, that is the more highly educated class, worshipped gods which
were unknown to the populace, and we know that the religious ideas of
the Peruvian rulers were on a very high plane. These higher beliefs,
where they occurred, were usually veiled in symbolism to guard them
from the vulgar; symbolism thrived in America, and the tendency to
esoteric doctrines, evolved by professional priesthoods, adds to the
difficulty of interpreting the remains of the earlier civilizations.
The degeneration of Gukumatz is seen in the later portion of the
Popol Vuh, where he is definitely associated with the Toltec in the
additional name “Ah Toltekat,” while reminiscences of his former
exalted status are apparent in later Mexican beliefs concerning him.
His association with the planet Venus, which is not apparent on
the monuments, belongs to the later stage, and, together with his
portraiture in carvings (e.g. Fig. 87; p. 367), apart from his symbolic
representation as a serpent-bird, has an important bearing on the
origin of the later buildings at Chichen Itza. The god Itzamna, also
called Yaxkokahmut, is again not very easy to fix; he is said to be the
son of the creator Hunabku and to have come from the east, but since he
is regarded as the inventor of writing, which must have been practised
long before the Maya entered Yucatan, this does not necessarily mean
that he came by sea, but only from some district lying to the east of
the territory occupied by his votaries at the time when they acquired
the art of writing. A comparison of the manuscripts with the account
of the ceremonies which ushered in the new year given by Landa seems
definitely to identify him with Schellhas’ “God D,” the “God with the
Roman nose” (Fig. 47, _d_). As such he is a sky-god, similar in
many respects to Tonacatecutli, and like him is often represented as an
old man with a beard. His head appears constantly upon the monuments,
either as a glyph, or issuing from the mouths of the double-headed
serpent, of which the body is ornamented with planet-symbols, and
which I believe to represent the sky. In later times in Yucatan he
bore a very close relation to the sun-god, Kinich-Ahau, and was to
a certain extent identified with him, in so far as we hear of an
image of Kinich-Ahau-Itzamna being prepared for certain ceremonies.
A figure exactly similar to that of Itzamna (identified as God D) is
sometimes shown, in manuscripts and reliefs and on pottery, with a
shell (Fig. 68; p. 312), and it may be argued from Mexican analogies
that this deity was also associated with the moon. How far Itzamna may
be identified with Itzamatul, the especial god of Itzamal, is perhaps
doubtful, but at any rate it is a coincidence that both were important
gods of healing. As regards Itzamatul it is said that his emblem was
a hand, and that he was also known as Kabul, the “Strong Hand”; in
this connection it is extremely interesting to note that two of the
stelæ at Piedras Negras (Pl. XX), one at Copan, a relief at Palenque,
and a fresco at Santa Rita in British Honduras, show a figure with a
head-dress in which a hand appears as the central feature. It is stated
further that his name implies association with the dew and clouds, and
that pilgrimages were made to his oracular shrine from Tabasco, Chiapas
and Guatemala.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XX_

    _By permission of the Peabody Museum_

  MAYA

  STELA 14; PIEDRAS NEGRAS, GUATEMALA]

The sun-god proper in Yucatan was, as stated before, Kinich-Ahau, and
at his temple in Itzamal the deity was supposed to descend at midday
to consume the offerings “as the macaw with its variegated plumage.”
The simile is interesting, since it recalls at once the reliefs
showing the offerings made to birds perched upon conventional trees
(wrongly termed crosses) at Palenque (Fig. 49), and the similar emblems
surmounted by birds held by some of the figures at Menché. Still more
interesting is the statement, found in the works of Burgoa, that at
Teotitlan in the Zapotec country was a temple with a celebrated idol
which was said to have come from heaven in the form of a bird in the
midst of a luminous constellation. One of the glyphs identified with
practical certainty is that of the sun, and figures or heads of deities
with his glyph, “kin,” upon the forehead are found in the manuscripts
and upon the monuments. Such is Schellhas’ God G, who differs from
Itzamna only in the presence of the kin-mark and of a peculiar curved
nose-ornament (Fig. 47, _b_). On the monuments this god is
invariably shown with peculiarly filed teeth, a characteristic which
persists even when the kin-mark is absent (see Fig. 72; p. 316, and
the cover-design), and a long beard-like appendage beneath his chin
which probably represents the rays of the sun (Fig. 55, _e_; p.
251). But at the date at which the manuscripts were inscribed, as in
later Yucatan, the personalities of Itzamna and the sun-god proper
were rather confused, and the tendency can be observed even upon the
monuments. The association of the sun with war is not so evident among
the Maya as among the Aztec, still I think that it may be traced in
the fact that nearly all the shields carried by figures carved upon
the monuments bear as a device the face of the sun, distinguished by
the peculiar form of the teeth. The magnificent relief in the temple
at Palenque, usually known as the “temple of the sun,” represents in
reality one of these shields slung from two crossed spears, and it is
possible that the temple itself was dedicated to the war-god (Fig.
82; p. 344). Another feature of the sun-face, when shown thus _en
face_, is a twisted snake with the fold upon the nose, but arranged
in the reverse position to that seen upon certain of the Tlaloc faces
in Mexico (compare Fig. 86, _f_; p. 356). It is worth noting,
however, that Tlaloc is often shown with the attributes of Tonatiuh
in the Mexican manuscripts. In addition to these gods, the Yucatec
also believed in the existence of a creator, Hunabku, father of
Itzamna, though, like many creating-deities, he does not seem to have
been honoured with any definite cult. It is possible that he is to
be identified with Hunahpu, a god who held a similar position in the
mythology of the Quiché, and who was associated in the work of creation
with Gukumatz and Hurakan. The latter was also termed the “Heart of
Heaven,” and was a thunder- and lightning-god. As such he was also a
god of fertility. The association of lightning with fertility is not
perhaps apparent until it is remembered that most rain in the tropics
is accompanied by thunder; for this reason Tlaloc and Chac, both of
them thunder-gods, are gods of agriculture, and the dualism which makes
the god who smites with the lightning the god also of the fertilizing
rain is found in South America, in Peru, and in the Antilles. Whilst
on this subject the existence of a special maize-god may be mentioned.
This personage does not appear in the pantheon of the later Yucatec,
for whom the Chac were the agricultural deities, but he is shown
constantly in the manuscripts (Schellhas’ God E, Fig. 46, _d_),
and on the monuments. But his position is peculiar; even in the earlier
times the rain-gods represented the active principle of fertility, the
maize-god being merely passive, and typifying the spirit of the maize,
befriended by the beneficent powers and persecuted by the lord of the
underworld and the various animals which plunder the growing crop. On
the monuments he is distinguished by a foliated ornament, representing
the corncob, which forms his head-dress, and he appears most
conspicuously in the so-called “foliated cross” at Palenque (Fig. 49),
which in reality represents a maize-plant like the Mexican Tree of the
West, shown in Fig. 10; p. 79. In the manuscripts he wears a similar
head-dress, but is usually shown also with a vertical line running down
his face passing across his eye, just as Cinteotl is depicted in the
manuscripts of Mexico.

  [Illustration: FIG. 49.--Stone relief; Temple of the
  Foliated Cross, Palenque.

  (_After Maudslay_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 50.--The two-headed monster;
  from a stone carving at Copan.

  (_After Maudslay_)]

The lords of the underworld held an important position in Maya
mythology. The Yucatec recognized two destinations for departed
spirits; one was a sort of paradise, where the souls of the dead rested
in the shade of the mythical Yaxché tree, the other was called Mitnal,
and corresponded to the Aztec Mictlan. Here presided a god called
Hunahau or Uac Mitun Ahau, whose attributes are exactly similar to
those of Mictlantecutli. He is usually, though not invariably, shown
as a skeleton, and skulls and cross-bones, bell-like pendants and
sometimes a feather ruff are his chief _insignia_ (Schellhas’
God A, Fig. 47, _e_). He is very frequently depicted in the
manuscripts, and appears on the monuments chiefly in the form of a
skull. The Kakchiquel spoke of him as Mictan Ahau, and associated
with him two subordinate deities, Tatan Holon and Tatan Bak (“Father
Bones and Father Skull”). The Quiché termed the underworld Xibalba,
a word which was also used with the same connotation by the Maya and
Kakchiquel. The story of the demi-gods Hunahpu and Xbalanque gives a
detailed description of Xibalba. The road to it lies downwards beneath
the earth, and its rulers are Hun Camé and Vukub Camé (terms in
which we can recognize the Maya word cimi, the name of the day-sign
corresponding to miquiztli, symbolized by a skull), whose messengers
are the owls. It is expressly stated in the Popol Vuh, however, that
the inhabitants of Xibalba are not gods, but beings of a supernatural
character who delight in bringing evil upon men and stirring up strife
between nations. There are many points about the “harrying” of Xibalba
by the two heroes mentioned above which seem to suggest that the
original Xibalba was situated in a region at that time inhabited by
the Kakchiquel. One of the principal powers there is the Camazotz, a
supernatural bat, who nearly compasses the destruction of the heroes
in the Zotziha or “bat-house,” and, as has been stated, the principal
deity of the Kakchiquel was a god in bat-form called Zotziha Chimalcam.
Moreover the owl-messengers of Xibalba bear the title of Ahpop Ahchi,
a title which also appears at the Kakchiquel court. Connected with
the gods of the underworld was the Maya goddess Ixtab, who received
the souls of those who committed suicide (by hanging). A figure which
probably represents her appears once in the Dresden codex, in the
form of a woman with her head in a noose (Fig. 47, _f_). She was
associated however rather with the paradise than with Mitnal, since
individuals who hung themselves were considered to be assured of future
happiness. A few more gods might be mentioned, but as practically
nothing is known of them save their names, and they do not appear on
the monuments as far as can be traced at present, they are omitted.
But a word must be said concerning certain mythological animals which
figure in the sculptures. Chief of these is a monster resembling a
dragon, which is furnished with a head at either end of the body (Fig.
50). The head proper is distinguished by an inordinately long upper
jaw, and exhibits otherwise certain characteristics usually associated
with the serpent in Maya art. The mouth is invariably shown wide open,
with the head of a god, usually the sun-god (though sometimes God B),
emerging. The reverse head, often shown upside-down, is portrayed with
a fleshless jaw and other symbols of death, but is also associated
with the sun in so far as it bears upon the forehead the kin-glyph,
over which are certain ornaments, notably a flame-like “plume,” which
are attributes of the sun. Now the head proper, with the elongated
upper jaw, bears a distinct resemblance to the Mexican cipactli
animal, from which the earth was created, and in a very confused
creation-myth given in one of the books of Chilan Balam we find a
monster, Itzamkab-ain, who at the creation is impregnated by a god of
fecundity, Ah-uuk-chek-nale. Further the earth in Mexican symbolic art
is invariably represented by a monster with gaping jaws, which is often
shown as swallowing Tonatiuh or Tlaloc. I think that it is perfectly
just to conclude that the so-called “double-headed dragon” of Maya art
is the earth-monster. As we have seen, the god who is usually shown in
his jaws is the sun-god, and the occasional substitution of God B is
paralleled in the Mexican manuscripts which sometimes show Tlaloc in
the jaws of the earth-monster. The head with the attributes of death
and the sun combined, which appears at the other end of the animal
(sometimes, as I have said, upside-down), is, on this explanation, the
sun in the underworld, i.e. the sun after its setting. The presence
of the sun-attributes is necessitated by the fact that without them
the death-face would be indistinguishable from that of the death-god,
whereas the head of the other god requires no special identification
marks. There are a good many additional points which support this view,
but I will mention two only. The magnificent carved lintel from Tikal,
now at Basle, shows a figure with all the attributes of the death-god
beneath a particularly elaborate example of the double-headed monster.
The position of the monster here is unusual, since it is usually shown
as a support rather than as a canopy, but I think that in this case
it emphasizes the fact that the home of the death-god is below the
earth. The other point is the following: in the relief at Palenque,
known as the cross, the conventional tree (for such it is in reality),
springs from the head with the combined death- and sun-symbols (Fig.
51). In this case the part is taken for the whole, the head represents
the earth-monster, and the whole scene is an exact parallel to the
Borgia codex, in which the trees of the world-directions are shown
rooted in the body of the monstrous earth-goddess (Fig. 10; p. 79).
The Vaticanus B codex is an even closer parallel, since the trees
representing the quarters are there depicted as springing from a
cipactli head, and it will be remembered that the Mexicans believed
the earth to have been created from a monstrous cipactli (p. 59). It
is true that the “foliated cross” is supported by a head of another
type, but there is a particular reason for this; the “foliated cross”
is in reality a maize-plant, the head is that of a rain- or water-god
(of whom parallels are found at Chichen Itza and other places), and
the combination symbolizes the dependence of the maize-crop upon the
water-supply. The finest example of the double-headed earth-monster
is the remarkable monolith, designated P, at Quirigua (Pl. XXVI, 1;
p. 338.) The illustration shows the principal head of the animal with
widely-distended jaws enclosing the figure of a deity.

  [Illustration: FIG. 51.--Rear head of the two-headed
  monster; Temple of the Cross, Palenque.

  (_After Maudslay_)]

The earth-monster is not however the only two-headed animal in Maya
art. Many of the stelæ, particularly those at Copan, Quirigua and
Naranjo, show a figure bearing in its arms an object usually known as
the “ceremonial bar” (see Pl. XXI; p. 236). In some cases the object
appears simply as a two-headed snake, with drooping body, but in the
majority of instances it resembles a beam with a snake-head at either
end. In either case the heads are similar, and resemble the main head
of the earth-monster; while the open jaws enclose the head of a god,
usually God B, the rain-god, but sometimes the sun- or sky-god. Where
the body assumes the beam form, it is divided into panels, enclosing
glyphs which are almost certainly symbols of certain planets, the sun,
moon, day and night. Now practically throughout America the snake is
the emblem of clouds, rain and lightning, and I would suggest that this
symbol represents the sky. From this point of view the association of
the planet symbols, and the gods of the sun and rain, is explained,
and one immediately recalls the myth according to which the creator
placed the four Bacabs at the cardinal points to support the heavens.
It may be that the figure which holds the “bar” may represent one of
these deities; and this suggestion is to some extent supported by
the following facts. Many, though not all, of the stelæ bear dates
recording even katun quarters (a katun = 7200 days, see p. 251), and
it is possible that these stelæ were erected to mark the lapse of
regular periods of time. The historical Maya were in the habit, so
Landa states, of setting up a “stone” to commemorate the passing of
a katun, and also of holding certain ceremonies at one of the sacred
piles of stones outside the village in honour of the commencement of
each solar year. These ceremonies were in honour of the Bacab, who was
supposed to preside over the year in question (see p. 263). Now a large
proportion of the figures portrayed upon stelæ at various sites carry,
instead of the “bar,” an object hitherto called the “mannikin sceptre.”
This is a short staff, presumably of wood, carved to represent God B
(or God K, both rain- and wind-gods), and terminating below the hand
in a curved projection representing the head of a snake (Fig. 52).
Now the real nature of this object has hitherto, most unaccountably,
been misunderstood. It is nothing more or less than a ceremonial axe,
the stone blade of which, bearing the marks which conventionally
expressed a stone implement, can in nearly every case be clearly
seen projecting from the forehead of the small figure. At Palenque
this blade is replaced by a foliated ornament, which may represent
an elaborate blade of copper, or, possibly, a bunch of feathers.
Considering the ceremonial nature of the implement, the substitution
in later times (for Palenque is perhaps the latest of the important
sites) for the unornamental stone of a tuft of gorgeous plumage is
easily understood and has many parallels in the history of ceremonial
weapons. Now the haft is carved in the likeness of the rain-god, the
snake is the emblem of rain, and the axe is _par excellence_
the weapon of the rain-deity, emblematical of thunder (see p. 221).
Thus again we arrive at the possibility that the bearer may be one of
the Bacabs, who seem to be identical with the Chac, or rain-gods of
Yucatan. Still, the identification of the main figures with the gods
who support the sky is not one on which I would insist at present. The
personages who bear the emblems of the sky and rain may be merely the
priests of the all-important deities of fertility, or chieftains who
are thus endowed with the symbols of divine power. I have given perhaps
disproportionate space to the discussion of these three symbols, the
earth-monster, the sky-snake and the ceremonial axe, because I wish
to emphasize two points; firstly that the accounts of the historical
Yucatec do undoubtedly throw some light upon the monumental remains of
earlier date; and secondly that the root-ideas of Mexican and Mayan
religion are closely akin and cannot with profit be studied separately.
It is the full recognition of these two axioms, combined of course with
his own remarkable intellectual gifts, which gives the investigations
of Seler so signal and permanent a value.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXI_

   _Photo. Dr. A. P. Maudslay_

  MAYA

  STELA H.; COPAN, HONDURAS]

  [Illustration: FIG. 52.--Ceremonial axes from the
  monuments.

    _a._ Tzendales.
    _b._ Palenque.
    _c._ Quirigua.
    _d._ Palenque.
    _e._ Menché.]

Of other mythological animals, mention may be made of the
_moan_-bird, a bird of the falcon variety, associated with the sky
and clouds, and possessing rather sinister characteristics (Fig. 46,
_a_). Also of the lightning-animal, sometimes pictured as a dog,
sometimes as a hoofed creature with a snout resembling a pig’s, and
usually shown descending from the sky. When the horse first made its
appearance among the Maya it was associated with this animal, and one
of Cortés’ sick horses which he left among the natives was installed in
a temple and worshipped as such. Unfortunately the poor animal did not
long survive its deification, being unable to adapt itself to a diet of
chickens and flowers, the offerings made to it in all good faith by the
natives.

Like the Aztec, the Maya and cognate tribes believed that more than
one creation had taken place, and we find the tradition of a great
deluge which put an end to the age immediately preceding this. In the
Quiché legend, Hunahpu, Gukumatz and Hurakan are the creating-gods;
“Earth,” said they, and immediately the earth was formed. Then the
animals were created, and various functions were distributed among
them, but the gods were not satisfied, because the animals were
speechless and could not praise them. So man was made from clay, but
he was without intelligence and the gods destroyed him. Then came
the third creation; after consultation with Xpiyakok and Xmukane,
the creators made men from wooden images, but these too were without
intelligence and paid no worship to the divine powers; so the majority
were destroyed by a great flood, while many perished at the hands of
the animals and domestic utensils which revolted against them, the
few survivors becoming monkeys. At this point the Popol Vuh relates
the story of the two heroes Hunahpu (not the Hunahpu mentioned as the
creator) and Xbalanque. They are first introduced as the slayers of a
kind of Titan, Vukub Kakix, and his two sons, Kabrakan and Zipakna.
It is said that the eyes of Vukub Kakix were of silver, his body of
precious metals, and his teeth inlaid with gems, and he became so
haughty that he usurped the power of the sun. The two heroes robbed
the tree, whence he was accustomed to obtain his food, of its fruit,
and when he ascended into the branches, blew at him through a magical
blow-gun, which dealt destruction without ammunition, and he fell
and broke his jaw. The heroes however did not escape scot-free, for
Vukub Kakix tore off Hunahpu’s arm, which he hung up above his hearth
in order to inflict torments upon its former possessor by sympathetic
magic. Hunahpu enlisted the help of two magicians, probably Xpiyakok
and Xmukane in disguise, who, under pretence of curing Vukub Kakix’s
jaw, extracted his teeth, so that his power departed from him and he
died, and the arm was recovered. Zipakna and Kabrakan seem to have
been earthquake deities; the former was the “creator of mountains,”
the latter the “destroyer of mountains,” and they too incurred the
enmity of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Zipakna had been persuaded by certain
four hundred young men to dig for them the hole in which to erect the
main post of a house, and they intended to bury him alive while thus
engaged; but he constructed a side-tunnel in which he hid, and cut off
his hair and nails which he gave to the ants to carry to the surface so
that the four hundred might believe him to be dead. Finally emerging
from his hiding-place when the young men were making merry over his
supposed decease, he pulled the house down over them and killed them
all. In revenge for this he was destroyed by Hunahpu and Xbalanque by
means of a stratagem, and his brother Zipakna perished in a similar
manner. The next act of the two brothers was to avenge the death of
their father and uncle at the hands of the inhabitants of Xibalba.
Xpiyakok and Xmukane had two sons, Hun Hunahpu and Vukub Hunahpu, who
one day while playing the ball-game tlaxtli attracted the notice of
the lords of the underworld. “Who are these,” they said, “who make so
much noise and cause the earth to shake over our heads?” So they sent
their messengers, the owls, to challenge them to a game. Hun Hunahpu
and Vukub Hunahpu take up the challenge, and start off for Xibalba,
passing down a steep descent, and across several rivers, one of which
is full of gourds, another of blood, and come to four cross-roads,
coloured yellow, red, white and black, the colours associated with
the four cardinal points. They take the last and arrive at Xibalba,
where they are received by the rulers Hun Camé and Vukub Camé. The
court at Xibalba seems to have been conducted on the principle of a
secret society with a definite form of initiation, for the new-comers
are forthwith submitted to various tests at all of which they fail,
and they are finally sacrificed by having their hearts torn out
before being allowed to engage in the game for which they had come.
Hun Hunahpu’s head is suspended in a tree which immediately becomes
covered with calabashes so that the head is indistinguishable from the
fruit. The head however retains its vital properties, since when Xquik,
daughter of one of the high officials of Xibalba, is standing near
the tree, it spits into her hand, causing her to conceive. When her
condition is discovered, she is delivered over to the owl messengers
to be killed, but escapes to the upper world where she seeks out the
dwelling of Xmukané and gives birth to Hunahpu and Xbalanque mentioned
above. With Xmukané are living Hun Batz and Hun Chuen, also sons of Hun
Hunahpu, who are accomplished musicians, dancers and artisans. These
two persecute their half-brothers, who take their revenge as follows:
The four start out to hunt, and Hun Batz and Hun Chuen are persuaded to
climb into the trees to drive the birds. Hunahpu and Xbalanque cause
the trees to start growing, so that their half-brothers cannot come
down, and persuade them, when they complain, to loosen their girdles so
that their movements may be the less restricted. The loosened girdles
immediately become tails, and Hun Batz and Hun Chuen are transformed
into monkeys. After a series of events Hunahpu and Xbalanque, by
the aid of a rat, discover the existence of a set of implements and
ornaments, used in the ball-game, which had formerly belonged to their
father and uncle. They start to play, and again the noise of the game
attracts the notice of the lords of Xibalba, who again send a challenge
which is accepted. But this time affairs proceed on different lines.
When they arrive at the cross-roads they send on a small insect, called
_xan_, created from a hair of Hunahpu’s leg, to act as a spy. The
xan finds the lords of Xibalba sitting with their councillors among
certain wooden figures, and by biting them one by one discovers their
names, so that when Hunahpu and Xbalanque arrive they salute each one
by his title, and do not, as their father and uncle, give greeting to
the wooden figures; they also avoid the hot stone which is offered
them as a seat, and pass the later tests with success. One of these
consisted in being shut up for the night in the “House of Gloom,”
with torches and cigars which must be kept burning all night and
produced intact in the morning. This feat the heroes achieve by fixing
red feathers to the torches and fireflies to the cigars. Eventually
disaster falls upon them in the “House of the Bats,” the Zotziha. The
point of this test seems to be that the heroes must pass the night
sleepless, erect and motionless, but Hunahpu moves his head just as
the dawn is appearing, and is immediately decapitated by the Camazotz,
the bat of the underworld, who leaps upon him from above. The head
is suspended in the ball-court, but the tortoise affixes himself to
Hunahpu’s body in its place. Xbalanque then goes out alone to face the
Xibalbans in the ball-game; he hits the ball close to the ring, and the
rabbit which is hidden near it leaps out and runs away. The Xibalbans
give chase, thinking that the rabbit is the ball, and Xbalanque
exchanges the tortoise for the head, and Hunahpu is revived. The heroes
then immolate themselves, but return after five days in the disguise of
travelling conjurers, performing many miracles, including the sacrifice
and resurrection of a man. Hun Camé and Vukub Camé desire to have
this trick performed upon them, but the heroes after sacrificing them
naturally do not revive them. Xibalba is thus conquered, and sentence
is pronounced by the heroes upon its people, “Your blood shall endure
for a little, but your ball shall not roll again in the ball-game,” and
the only occupations which they are allowed to retain are the making of
pots and the keeping of bees. Following this, honours are paid to Hun
Hunahpu and Vukub Hunahpu, who become the sun and moon respectively,
while the four hundred slain by Zipakna are resuscitated and become
stars. Certain similarities with Mexican mythology are apparent in this
legend, notably the miraculous conception of Hunahpu and Xbalanque by a
virgin, recalling the birth of Uitzilopochtli, and the transformation
of the four hundred into stars, which is reminiscent of the legend of
the Centzon Uitznaua (Four hundred Southerners) who also became stars.
In this connection it is interesting to note that a legend is found in
San Salvador, according to which four hundred youths disappeared into a
certain lake and were transformed into fishes.

Such in brief is the myth of Hunahpu and Xbalanque as given in the
Popol Vuh, but there are many extremely interesting details which
lack of space compels me to omit, but which can be found in the
translations, French or Spanish, or the English abridgment, of the
original Quiché text.

The story of the fourth and final creation again shows a similarity
with one of the Mexican legends given above. The creators decide to
make man of maize, but the maize cannot be found. It is eventually
discovered at Paxil, the Maya equivalent of Tonacatepetl, through the
agency of the fox, coyote, parrot and crow. It is ground, and from the
meal the body of man is formed, while Xpiyakok and Xmukané make from
it nine different kinds of drink which give vigour to created man. At
this time the ancestors of the Quiché are created, and from this point
the “historical” portion of the Popol Vuh begins. The Kakchiquel had
a similar myth relative to the discovery of maize by the animals, and
they believed that man, as finally created, was formed of maize and
blood, the men of a former creation having been unable to speak or walk
and feeding on wood and leaves. In Yucatan the first men were said to
have been made of earth and straw, their bodies of the former and their
hair of the latter.




            CHAPTER X--THE MAYA: THE CALENDAR, CALENDRICAL
                FEASTS AND MINOR RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES


Before proceeding further with the account of Maya religion, it will be
necessary to give a short description of the calendrical system. This
was very similar to that of the Mexicans, but was more elaborate, and
enabled the Maya to deal with longer periods of time. Throughout the
Maya country a series of twenty day-signs was current, which, combined
with the numerals one to thirteen, as described on p. 61, gave a period
of 260 days, the Mexican tonalamatl, before the same day-sign recurred
with the same numeral. The tonalamatl however did not occupy nearly so
prominent a place in Maya ritual as in Mexican, though certain portions
of the manuscripts seem to be devoted to it.

Some of the Maya day-signs show a close accordance with the
corresponding Mexican signs, others seem at first sight quite
different. But Seler has shown, by a careful comparison with the
day-names current in the Zapotec country, that most of these
differences can be reconciled. He calls attention to the fact that
the Zapotec name is in most cases equivocal and can be translated to
suit either the Mexican or the Maya sign. The Zapotec themselves used
the Mexican signs, to judge from the remains in their country, but
they carved them in Maya fashion, i.e. surrounded by a “cartouche”
which does not appear in the glyphs of the Aztec period. The use of
the cartouche, however, is found extending up through the Cuernavaca
region to the Mexican valley, but only on pre-Aztec monuments, as I
have stated on p. 174 (Figs. 15 and 33, _a_; pp. 106 and 176). It
may be taken almost for certain therefore that the Zapotec acted as
middlemen in the spread of the calendar in one direction or the other.
But this is a subject to which I shall return later.

The Mayan day-signs are as follows (Fig. 53 and Appendix I):--

_Imix._ This sign corresponds to the Mexican Cipactli, and the
Zapotec word for it also has reference to the crocodile, while the
Maya sign itself bears a close resemblance (not, I believe, hitherto
noted) with the form of eye occasionally given to the double-headed
earth-monster, as can be seen in Pl. XXVI.

_Ik._ This glyph contains the peculiar T-shaped eye found in the
head which forms the name-glyph of God B (Fig. 46, _e_; p. 221).
This I interpret as an eye from which tears are streaming, symbolical
of rain, and it is noticeable that Eecatl, whose head constitutes the
corresponding Mexican day-sign, is shown with a weeping eye (Fig. 4,
_d_; p. 35).

_Akbal._ This is a conventional skull-face, and represents night
or darkness, appearing frequently on the “sky-bar.” The corresponding
Zapotec word also implies night, and the Mexican calli (a house without
windows) may well have the same connotation.

_Kan._ This probably represents a grain of “popped” corn, and
the Zapotec word may be taken to refer either to corn or a frog.
The Mexican sign is a lizard, and was associated with agricultural
fertility.

_Chicchan._ This sign shows the peculiar cross-hatched spot so
often seen applied as ornament to the bodies of serpents; the Zapotec
name appears to mean “omen-bearer,” and the Mexican sign is a snake.

_Cimi._ The head of the death-god, as among the Mexicans.

  [Illustration: FIG. 53.--Maya day-signs; upper rows
  from the monuments; lower rows from the MS.

    A. imix.
    B. ik.
    C. akbal.
    D. kan.
    E. chicchan.
    F. cimi.
    G. manik.
    H. lamat.
    K. muluc.
    L. oc.
    M. chuen.
    N. eb.
    O. ben.
    P. ix.
    Q. men.
    R. cib.
    S. caban.
    T. eznab.
    U. cauac.
    V. ahau.]

_Manik._ A hand in the attitude of conveying food to the mouth.
Seler suggests that the word may come from may-nik = cloven hoof. The
Mexican sign is a deer’s head or hoof, and the Zapotec word also means
deer. The flesh of this animal was the principal animal food of the
Maya.

_Lamat._ The Zapotec word means “divided,” and this corresponds
with the Maya sign; but it is difficult to see how either can be
brought into relation with the Mexican tochtli, a rabbit.

_Muluc._ Both the Zapotec and Mexican words mean “water,” and
probably the Maya sign, though much conventionalized, may have a
similar significance.

_Oc._ The sign represents the head or ear of the dog as pictured
in the MSS., and thus corresponds to the Mexican itzcuintli.

_Chuen._ Probably the conventionalized face of a monkey, in which
case the sign corresponds to the Mexican ozomatli. The Kakchiquel word
for this day is Batz and it will be remembered that in the Quiché
legend Hun Chuen and Hun Batz were turned into monkeys.

_Eb._ The grotesque head with its prominent teeth and fringed
“ear” corresponds to the jaw-bone and bunch of grass of the Mexican
malinalli.

_Ben._ The Zapotec word means “reed,” and so corresponds with the
Mexican acatl, while the Maya glyph probably represents a reed mat.

_Ix._ The sign represents the spotted face of the ocelot, which
also gives its name to the corresponding Mexican day.

_Men._ An aged face; the Mexican sign is the eagle, closely
connected with the aged goddess Tonantzin.

_Cib._ The sign seems to be connected in some way with honey-wine
or mead, and frequently appears upon jars in the MSS. The Mexican sign
is the vulture, a symbol of old age, and it will be remembered that in
Mexico only the aged were allowed free use of intoxicants.

_Caban._ This seems to be the earthquake sign, used also to typify
motion, as the Mexican olin.

_Eznab._ This sign appears on spear-heads, and seems to indicate a
flaked stone, thus corresponding with the Mexican tecpatl.

_Cauac._ This sign represents the thunder-clouds, while the small
cross is emblematical of the wind which blows from all quarters;
it thus corresponds with the Mexican quiauitl, and the connection
is emphasized by the fact that the Kakchiquel word for rain is
_caok_, and the Tzental term for thunder is _chauk_.

_Ahau._ A face, sometimes, in the more elaborate of the
sculptures, the head of a man of rank, which the word ahau implies.
Xochitl, the flower, the last sign of the Mexican list, is, it will be
remembered, the emblem of the god Xochipilli, the guardian of princes.

Like the Mexicans, the Maya observed the solar year of 365 days,
divided into eighteen months of twenty days each, with five days over,
called uayeb, and considered unlucky. The names of these months were as
follows (Fig. 54 and Appendix II):--

Pop, Uo, Zip, Zotz, Tzec, Xul, Yaxkin, Mol, Chen, Yax, Zac, Ceh, Mac,
Kankin, Muan, Pax, Kayab, Cumhu, five Uayeb days.

  [Illustration: FIG. 54.--Maya month-signs; upper
  rows from the monuments; lower rows from the MSS.

    A. pop.
    B. uo.
    C. zip.
    D. zotz.
    E. tzec.
    F. xul.
    G. yaxkin.
    H. mol.
    K. chen.
    L. yax.
    M. zac.
    N. ceh.
    O. mac.
    P. kankin.
    Q. muan.
    R. pax.
    S. kayab.
    T. cumhu.
    U. uayeb.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 55.--Maya period-signs. Upper
  row, face-signs; lower row, normal signs.

    A. cycle.
    B. katun.
    C. tun.
    D. uinal.
    E. kin.]

Unlike the Mexican months, however, these were used in dating, and a
given day was expressed with its month-sign, together with a numeral to
show which day of the month it was. Thus 6. caban, 5. pop, means the
day 6. caban, after 5 days of the month pop have passed. The numerals
were not expressed on quite the same system as the Mexican. Dots were
used for the numerals up to four, but a bar was used for five, two bars
for ten, and so on, odd days over a multiple of five being expressed by
the requisite number of dots. On the monuments, if the supernumerary
dots were few, the space between or on either side of them was filled
with small crescents, which are merely ornamental and must be
carefully distinguished from the dots themselves. Occasionally in the
more elaborate carvings the numbers from 0 to nineteen are expressed by
faces. In the case of 0 the lower jaw is formed by a hand, and numbers
over ten are expressed by the face assigned to the corresponding unit
but with a fleshless jaw. Ten itself is the head of the death-god. Zero
in the normal notation is expressed either by a hand or a figure shaped
somewhat like a Maltese cross. The use of the zero is explained later.
The Maya, like ourselves, were in the habit of expressing a high number
by a succession of figures which combined to form a numeral, but they
did not employ the decimal system. Their system, when applied to the
computation of time, was on the whole, but not entirely, vigesimal,
and was as follows. Twenty days, or _kin_, formed a _uinal_,
and the uinal thus corresponded to one of their months; but the next
higher unit, the _tun_, consisted of eighteen uinal, and contained
360 days, being thus equivalent to a year _minus_ the five uayeb
days. Twenty tun made a katun (7200 days), and twenty katun went to
another period of which the name is not known, but which is usually
called a cycle (144,000 days). There are indications that a higher
unit still was recognized, the so-called “great cycle,” consisting of
thirteen cycles (1,872,000 days). Each of these periods was expressed
by an appropriate glyph, and these glyphs were in two styles, being
either what is usually termed “normal” signs, or face-signs (Fig. 55).
The latter exhibit considerable variation, especially that of the great
cycle; but the cycle bird-face is recognizable by the jaw-bone in the
shape of a hand (recalling the face-paint of the Mexican gods into
whose name the numeral five enters as a component part), the katun by a
similar bird-face with a normal jaw, the tun by the normal glyph which
it bears on its head, or its fleshless jaw, the uinal by its frog-like
appearance and the curl at the corner of its mouth, and the kin by the
glyph on the forehead or the filed teeth. In many of the more elaborate
carvings the significance of the sign is shown more by its position in
the series than by anything else. Now a great number of the stelæ bear
inscriptions which start with a high number expressed in this manner
(Fig. 56); at the top is the great cycle glyph, which is an elaborate
affair and really means little more than that a count of days is to
follow, since there could hardly be any mistake regarding this period
which represents over fifty-one centuries. Below, usually in two
columns of glyphs, is a number of days, expressed in cycles, katuns,
tuns, uinals and kins, and this is followed by a day-and-month date.
In the transliteration of Mayan dates, the numerals alone are given as
a rule; thus the date shown in Fig. 56, _b_, transliterated as
9. 16. 10. 0. 0. 1 _ahau_, 3 _zip_, means the day 1 ahau,
after 3 days of the month _zip_ have passed, being 9 cycles,
16 katuns, 10 tuns, 0 uinals, and 0 kins from the chronological
starting-point of the present “Great Cycle.” Now the astonishing fact
is this, that throughout the whole of the Maya country, i.e. the area
over which ruins in the Maya style are scattered, including Chiapas,
Guatemala, Yucatan and northern Honduras, if the long count of days
(expressed in cycles, katuns, etc.) be reckoned back from the final
day-and-month date, the same day is always reached, viz. 4. ahau,
8. cumhu. Thus all Maya reckoning dates from one definite day in the
past, and this day must almost certainly be an artificial date in the
sense that it must have been obtained by calculation at a far later
time, since it is practically four thousand years from the earliest
date which can in any sense be claimed as historical.[5] The starting
date itself is found at Quirigua (on a stela which also bears a date
in the ninth cycle), and here it is shown to be the concluding date of
a cycle thirteen, which must be the last cycle of the preceding “grand
cycle.” Many, if not most, of the inscriptions seem to be devoted to
the calculation of dates; in the course of the glyphs, most as yet
unreadable, one continually comes upon a “distance-number” expressed as
above, and then the day-and-month sign to which this leads, reckoning
from the date last given. In the longer inscriptions, notably that
in the “temple of inscriptions” at Palenque, which contains over six
hundred consecutive glyphs, these calculations extend over considerable
periods of time. The great probability is that such calculations are
not historical, but of a ritual nature. The Maya had no system of
intercalary days by which the year of 365 days could be squared with
true solar time, and it is probable that the feasts appropriate to
certain seasons were shifted from month to month when the discrepancy
became noticeable. Perhaps then these calculations had reference to
the ritual calendar in accordance with which the various festivals
were held. It must be remembered that the Maya in their count of days
reckoned only elapsed time, expressing only a full tale of days. Thus
each date is in one sense one day behind the date as we express it.
This sounds complicated, but the difficulty disappears if we regard
their method from the same point of view as our own reading of the
clock. Whereas we speak of the fifteenth of June while the day is yet
incomplete, yet we refer to a point in the third hour after noon in
terms of two o’clock, viz. 2.20, or 2.45. Thus for the first day of a
month we find the symbol zero, and 0. zotz means that the month zip is
concluded, but that the first day of zotz is not yet complete. So it
is that the katuns (and other periods) are known by the name of the
last day of the previous katun, 5. ahau, 3. ahau, and so on, and are
not named after the day imix which is the first of the series of twenty
day-signs, and is actually the first day of the time-periods from cycle
to tun. The Maya method of dating enabled them to fix the position of
a definite day without risk of confusion over long periods of time. If
the day-sign with its attendant number, and the position in a definite
month, is given, that day is fixed for a period of 52 years. If the
number of the tun in which it occurs is also stated, it is fixed for
a period of 936 years (i.e. 936 years must elapse before a day with a
similar series of signs and numbers can recur). If the number of the
katun is also expressed, the position is determined for 18,720 years;
and if the number of the cycle as well, a period of 374,400 years.

  [Illustration: FIG. 56.--Date inscriptions.

  A. Normal numerals, reading 9. 15. 0. 0. 0.[6] 4.
  _ahau_, 13 _yax_. (Copan, altar S). B.
  Face-numerals, reading 9. 16. 10. 0. 0. 1. _ahau_, 3.
  _zip_. (Quirigua, stela F).

  (_After Maudslay_)]

Since the year contained 365 days, and the day-signs were 20 in number,
it is obvious that the year began on one of four days. These days,
later called “year-bearers,” were, at the time of the monuments and
the writing of the Dresden codex, ben, eznab, akbal and lamat, which
correspond to the days which began the Mexican year, acatl, tecpatl,
calli and tochtli. However, the year-bearers as given by Landa, and
also as they appear in the Troano-Cortesianus codex, are kan, muluc,
ix and cauac. This means that in the interval the commencement of the
year had shifted (5 × _x_) + 1 days, _x_ being an unknown
quantity. By this time too the long count in its most elaborate form
seems to have been abandoned, and the katun became the highest unit,
known by the name of its “initial” day, e.g. katun 6. ahau, or katun
4. ahau. It is this method of reckoning which is employed in the books
of Chilan Balam. Most of the other races of Maya stock, as far as is
known, possessed calendars which included a series of twenty day-signs
(see Appendix I) combined with the numerals one to thirteen, but the
count of the Kakchiquel was different, being purely vigesimal. The
periods involved were one of 400 days (20 × 20), called _huna_,
and a larger of 8000 days (20 huna), called _may_. The huna was
known by its initial day _ah_ (corresponding to ben and acatl)
together with the number which might be attached to it, and the time
count dated from the destruction of a rebellious sub-tribe, the
Tukuchi, which occurred in a huna 11. ah.

  [Illustration: FIG. 57.--Upper row, world-direction
  signs; lower row, colours.

    A. East and yellow.    B. North and red.    C. West and white.
    D. South and black.]


As among the Mexicans, the Maya years were related to the points of
the compass. The later Yucatec associated kan-years with the east,
muluc-years with the north, ix-years with the west and cauac-years
with the south, but the relation of the earlier year-bearers is not
clear, owing to the uncertainty which attaches to the glyphs expressing
the world-directions. On this point the evidence is very conflicting,
but I am inclined to think that most probably they are as shown in
Fig. 57. The doubt lies between east and west on the one hand and
between north and south on the other. The world-directions evidently
possessed much ritual importance among the Maya, though not perhaps so
much as among the Mexicans. In the creation myth in one of the books
of Chilan Balam we read of the establishment of four trees at the
four quarters, and one at the centre, a legend which recalls the five
trees with their respective birds shown in the Mexican codex Borgia
and allied manuscripts (Fig. 10; p. 79). The “crosses” at Palenque,
each of which is surmounted by a bird, probably also had reference
to two of the world-directions, in any case their resemblance to the
trees of the Borgia codex is striking. The four Bacabs who supported
the heavens north, south, east and west, have already been mentioned,
and also the four cross-roads on the way to Xibalba. Four colours are
associated with the last, and these are the colours which the later
Yucatec associated with the points of the compass, viz. yellow (kan)
with the east, red (chac) with the north, white (zac) with the west,
and black (ek) with the south (Fig. 57). The manuscripts however do not
always show the colours in association with the same direction-signs.
The colour assigned to the year appears in one of the series of names
assigned to the Bacab which was supposed to be its regent. Thus Hobnil,
regent of the kan-years, is called Kanal Bacab, Kanzicnal of the
muluc-years, Chacal Bacab, Zaczini of the ix-years, Zacal Bacab, and
Hozanek of the cauac-years, Ekel Bacab.

The Maya did not limit their calculations to the computation only of
the solar calendar, but also reckoned the synodical revolutions of the
planet Venus (584 days). Certain pages of the Dresden codex are devoted
to this purpose, and the glyph representing the planet is thus known.
Some investigators have tried to prove that the reappearances of other
planets, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn, were also computed, but
the evidence is unsatisfactory, and even in many cases adverse to the
supposition.

Our knowledge of the meaning of the Maya glyphs is practically limited
to the day-, month- and period-signs and the names of the gods. The
latter have been gleaned from the manuscripts. Here the figures of the
various divinities are accompanied by a series of four or more glyphs,
and after a careful comparison of the glyphs which are attached to one
particular figure, it is found that one glyph is constant. It is a
fair assumption that the latter expresses the name of the god, though
we cannot say how it should be transliterated. As we have seen, the
Mexican script is purely ideographic, that is to say the pictures are
symbolical, or, in the case of names, constitute a rebus. It seems
likely that the Maya writing had evolved a little further, and that
many of the signs were of a syllabic nature. For instance, in the names
of the months we find indications that definite signs were employed
to express the syllables _yax_ and _kin_; but as we cannot
say for certain what was the dialect spoken by the builders of the
monuments, and as many of the signs are so highly conventionalized
that their origin is difficult to trace, the interpretation is beset
with many difficulties. Lizana, writing in 1626, speaks of certain old
men, sons of priests, who were able to read the manuscripts, and it is
probable that the builders of the monuments spoke a tongue closely akin
to the historical Maya. In any case a good knowledge of this language
will be necessary for future students of the glyphs. As remarked
before, it seems unlikely that much information of a historical nature
will be extracted from the inscriptions if they are ever read; they
probably consist for the most part of calculations for fixing the
periodical feasts, and for bringing the year of 365 days into line with
true time. It is practically certain, as remarked above, that the Maya
did not intercalate days for this purpose, but it is equally certain
that a people who were agriculturists and who computed the synodical
revolutions of Venus, could not have failed to notice that the months
gradually gained upon the seasons. At the time of the discovery the
month pop began the year, but it is worth mentioning that the name of
the month xul seems to mean “termination,” and it is possible that
yaxkin was at some period the first month. The displacement of the
commencement of a year by a month would not affect the year-bearer,
since each month began with the same day-sign, and it is not unlikely
that the feasts were shifted from month to month when they became
inappropriate to the seasons. If this is so, no doubt many of the
longer inscriptions consist of calculations relative to the proper
ordering of the festivals. It is not of course absolutely certain that
the initial dates of monuments refer to their erection, but even if
such dates have a historical value (and I am inclined to believe that
most of them have) it is not yet possible to correlate them with our
own system of dating, at any rate with any degree of certainty, for the
reason that the position of their starting-point, 4. ahau, 8. cumhu, is
not fixed. But this is a subject to which I shall return later (p. 360.)

As in Mexico, so among the Maya, the importance of the calendar from
the religious point of view, and the close connection between religion
and agriculture, gave the priesthood enormous influence throughout
the country. According to Landa, a high-priest of the Yucatec was
called Ahkin Mai, or Ahaukan Mai; his office was hereditary, and he
was succeeded in it by a son or near relation. A less exalted rank was
held by the Chilan, or oracular priests, who declared the will of the
gods, and performed the functions of diviners and doctors. As might
be expected, these functionaries enjoyed great respect, and rarely
went abroad except in a litter. The Nacon were officials whose duties
were partly sacerdotal and partly military. In their first capacity,
as the sacrificing priests, they held office perpetually, but there
was also a military aspect to this office, since the commander of the
fighting forces was elected from among the Nacon, and held the position
for three years. Other priests, who performed definite functions as
assistants in certain ceremonies, were called Chac, and seem to have
been to some extent the representatives of the Bacabs, since four
officiated at once. Priests generally were called Ahkin, and the local
clergy were nominated by the high-priest after examination in ritual
and “science,” i.e. divination, writing and calendrical interpretation.
The priesthood at large educated candidates for admission to their
order, including also the younger sons of chiefs, who often “entered
the church.” They lived in buildings close to the temples, and there
were similar religious houses for the accommodation of celibate “nuns”
who were under the protection of a “mother superior.” Any lapse from
chastity on their part was punished with death, but any of the inmates
might leave the establishment by permission and marry, just as in
Mexico. It is probable that the buildings other than temples which
survive in the ruined cities are either the residences of princes or
religious establishments of this nature.

It seems likely that in the earlier times the priestly rule was
paramount, and that the rulers were high-priests or _vice versa_.
Even in Yucatan the traditions seem to point to a later transference
of political power from sacred to secular rulers. Among the Quiché
too, the first rulers, under whose guidance the principal migrations
were made, held authority as the interpreters of the will of the
gods assigned to the various divisions of the tribe, and the later
chiefs claimed descent from them. Among the Kakchiquel there were
two high-priests who held office for life, and were elected by the
king and council. One of these seems to have supervised the ritual,
while the other was the guardian of the sacred books and presided
over the calendar. There were also certain old men who lived in the
temple-buildings and were consulted as diviners on ordinary occasions.
These were distinguished by their hair, which they wore in plaits.

In Campeche, Diaz mentions priests who wore their hair long and matted
with blood, in Mexican style, and he further states that the people of
Chiapas brought with them into battle a “priestess or goddess” with
an incense-burner and stone idols. This priestess wore body-paint
with white down stuck upon it, another Mexican custom. Many of the
reliefs of the older Maya culture show priests engaged in various
functions, and the elaborate dresses in which these are often clad
have given rise to the supposition that many religious offices were
performed by priestesses. Figures in flowing robes are particularly
noticeable at Menché (Pl. XXII; p. 294), but, especially in later
Yucatan, women as a general rule were excluded from the more important
ceremonies, and I think that these figures merely represent men in
priestly _insignia_, which would naturally be of a more elaborate
nature than the ordinary dress. Sacrifice was common throughout the
Maya region, but the question how far human offerings were made in
early times is difficult to settle. There is only one scene upon the
monuments which maybe interpreted as a human sacrifice,[7] and this
occurs at Piedras Negras, but the negative evidence afforded by the
other reliefs throughout the Maya region would seem to suggest that the
practice was, at most, exceptional. Even the Dresden codex furnishes
no definite proof that the rite existed when it was written, though
there are scenes which may possibly be interpreted as suggesting
the custom. For instance, Fig. 63 (p. 301) shows a head lying on an
altar; but as it is clearly the head of the maize-god, the scene may
be interpreted as representing merely an offering of grain. In the
Quiché myths, the introduction of human sacrifice is associated with
the “Yaqui,” a name afterwards used of the Mexicans, and it is the god
Tohil, whom this people received from Tulan, who, by a trick, obtains
the right to the hearts of the other tribes in return for the gift
of fire. But the open and extensive practice of the rite belongs to
a later stage of Quiché history, as the Popol Vuh also demonstrates.
It is possible that the practice was, to speak generally, foreign to
the original Maya, but was introduced in later times from Mexico. It
seems to have been found among the Kakchiquel, accompanied on certain
occasions by cannibalism, and we learn that at a certain festival
children were killed with arrows, a ceremony recalling the Mexican
festival of Tlacaxipeualiztli. An even closer correspondence with the
ritual observed at this festival was found in Yucatan, where the victim
was on certain occasions flayed and the priest assumed the skin. Here
too the shooting sacrifice was practised; the victim was tied to a
tree, with a white mark painted over his heart; the worshippers passed
rapidly in front and each discharged arrows at the mark. Cogolludo
speaks of many bloody arrows being found in a shrine at Campeche, which
had probably been used in this rite. At Chichen Itza human sacrifice
was made to the sacred _cenote_ (natural well), which was supposed
to be a place of great sanctity. The victim was cast into the water
with other offerings and was believed to emerge alive after three days
had elapsed. The usual method of sacrifice however in Yucatan was
the tearing out of the victim’s heart by the Nacon, who anointed the
image with the blood. Here the custom had become very prevalent at the
discovery, as the fate of Valdivia’s crew in 1511 shows. Prisoners of
war, slaves and even children constituted the usual victims, and the
last were carefully guarded and paraded from village to village until
the fatal day arrived. But even at this date human sacrifices were
not made on the same scale as in Mexico, and the principal offerings
consisted of incense, animals, and the worshippers’ own blood. To
obtain the latter, the tongue, ears or limbs were pierced, and a cord
was frequently passed through the wound. Scenes showing the practice
of this penitential rite are not uncommon on the early monuments, as
can be seen from the slab from Menché (Pl. XXII; p. 294), where the
worshipper is passing through his tongue a cord furnished with thorns,
while a basket containing the implements for piercing lies on the
ground beside him. But the ritual of the later Maya will appear best
from a short description of the ceremonies observed at the commencement
of the year and during the various months.

  [Illustration: FIG. 58.--The ceremonies at the
  commencement and end of an _akbal_-year.

  (_Dresden MS._)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 59.--The new-year ceremonies at
  the commencement of a _muluc_-year.

  (_Troano-Cortesianus MS._)

  (_After Seler_)]

The new-year ceremonies were especially important, since the fortune
to be experienced during the year depended to a very large extent
upon their proper performance. They commenced in the Uayeb days of
the dying year, that is to say in the second week of July, according
to Landa. In preparation for a year beginning on the day-sign kan,
an image of the Bacab Hobnil was taken to the pile of stones at the
southern entrance to the town (the south being the point associated
with the dying year), and a figure of Ah Bolon Tzacab was carried
in procession and set up opposite it. Various offerings were made,
including the worshippers’ own blood, and Hobnil was then carried to
the east entrance (the point associated with the commencing year) and
left there to watch over the town, while Ah Bolon Tzacab was taken to
the temple. Good luck and fertility were expected during the kan years,
and if misfortune supervened, a special image of Itzamna-canil was made
and sacrifices, including a man, were offered to it. At the end of this
year, and in preparation for the next, a muluc-year, the ceremonies
commenced at the pile of stones where Hobnil had been left, and a
figure of Kanzicnal was substituted for it. The figure of Ah Bolon
Tzacab was replaced by one of Kinich Ahau, which was confronted with
the new Bacab and then borne to the temple, Kanzicnal being taken to
the north entrance, the quarter associated with muluc-years. This year
was again supposed to be good, and in the event of misfortune special
ceremonies were performed to Yaxkokahmut, another name of Itzamna,
including a dance on stilts and the sacrifice of dogs bearing offerings
of bread. It may be remarked in passing that both the Dresden and
Troano-Cortesianus codices illustrate these ceremonies (Figs. 58 and
59), though there is reason to believe that the lower portion of two
pages of the former manuscript have been transposed by the carelessness
of the scribe. In this MS. (Fig. 58) the upper scene shows the emblem
of the presiding god being carried in by a priest in an animal mask,
the central picture shows him installed and receiving offerings, the
lower (when properly arranged) illustrates the god of the next year
confronted with a pillar representing the Bacab on the Uayeb days at
the end of the year. Arranged in a column down one side of the page are
the signs of the last day of the old year and the first of the new.
As stated above the Dresden codex gives the days commencing the year
as ben, eznab, akbal and lamat, as do the monuments. The ben-years
here seem to correspond to the kan-years of later times, and so on.
The Tro.-Cor. (Fig. 59) seems to picture, in the upper register, the
ceremonies (including the dance on stilts in the muluc-year) which were
corrective of ill-luck, while the lower register shows the year-god
and the maize-god, the latter either flourishing, or the prey of birds
and beasts, according to the fortune predicted for the year. For the
ix-years the Bacab was Zaczini, and the presiding god Itzamna; the
ceremonies began at the north entrance and concluded at the west.
Maladies of the eyes, plagues of locusts, wars and changes of dynasties
were feared, and the year was considered bad for the food-crop but
good for cotton. Ceremonies were performed to Kinich Ahau Itzamna to
avert these evils. Cauac-years were the most unpropitious of all, for
the presiding deity was Uacmitun Ahau, the death-god. The Bacab was
Hozanek, and the ceremonies began in the west and terminated in the
south. Many deaths were expected, together with plagues of birds and
ants, to avert which four idols were made, Chichac-chob, Ekbalam-chac,
Ahkan-uolcab and Ahbuluk-balam, and the ceremonies in their honour
included a dance round a large fire, across which, when reduced to
glowing ashes, the worshippers ran with bare feet.

The principal ceremonies connected with the months were as follows (for
the signs, see Fig. 54, p. 250):--

_Pop._ The year began, according to Landa, on July 16th.
The priests and men of rank fasted for at least thirteen days in
preparation, and the commoners employed themselves in cleaning their
houses and renewing and repainting all utensils. Chacs or assistant
priests were elected for the ceremonies, and the temple court was
purified with incense, the Chacs holding cords to form a square, a
proceeding which, ceremonially, was supposed to exclude all evil.
Finally new fire was made by the Chacs and fresh incense was offered;
the proceedings terminated with a feast.

_Uo._ No special ceremonies attached to this month, but the
priests commenced to fast in preparation for the next.

_Zip._ A festival in honour of Kinich-ahau Itzamna was held, at
which the priests exhibited their religious books of bark-paper, and
uttered the prognostications, regarding the fortunes of the year, which
their calculations had revealed. Next day their bags of charms were
exposed to view, including all images of the goddess Ixchel and the
divining-stones, and the gods of medicine were invoked. The hunters
and fishers also held a private festival during this month. The former
performed a dance holding arrows and the heads of deer, while the
latter painted their fishing-implements blue, a sacred colour. These
ceremonies took place on different days, and in honour of special gods
whose names are given by Landa. When the fishing-festival was finished
in the towns, the lords repaired to the coast, where it was repeated.

_Zotz._ Bee-keepers prepared for their festival in the next month.

_Tzec._ The bee-keepers’ festival, to Hobnil and the other Bacabs,
during which much honey-wine was offered and consumed.

_Xul._ The great festival to Kukulkan, held at Mani after the
destruction of Mayapan. The other provinces sent deputations with
great feather banners, which were placed in the temple; new fire was
made, idols exhibited, and five nights were spent in singing and
dancing, during which professional singers went from house to house
of the lords. The offerings consisted mainly of food and drink, and
the deputations departed taking with them the banners which they had
brought.

_Yaxkin._ Preparations were made for a festival to be held in the
next month to all the gods (corresponding in some degree to the Mexican
Teotleco). The implements of all professions and domestic implements
were painted blue, and nine blue dots were marked on the hands of
children, to make them useful.

_Mol._ Besides the feast just mentioned, the bee-keepers held
another, in order that the gods might send a full supply of flowers for
the bees. In this month also began the preparations for the manufacture
of wooden idols, which was a very serious matter. The wooden idols,
which were more highly esteemed than those of stone or clay, were made
by professional artists, and it was believed that certain penalties
attached to the trade, viz. that the carving of an idol entailed the
death of one of the artists, or at least the contraction of some
heart-complaint. Certain priests, the Chacs and the artists themselves,
observed a rigorous fast, while those who desired idols procured
cedar-wood. A special hut was built, and the priests, Chacs and workers
were closely secluded in it while the work proceeded, the images in
course of construction being sprinkled with blood and censed with copal.

_Chen._ The new idols, now made, were taken to the temple, and
there purified and blessed by the officiating priest, after which they
were handed over to the new owners, wrapped in cloth and placed in a
basket. The stipulated price was paid in game and the local currency.

_Yax._ In this or the preceding month the temple in honour of the
Chac agricultural gods was renovated, and their pottery, idols and
braziers were repainted or renewed.

_Zac._ The hunters held a festival in order to appease the gods
for shedding blood, since bloodshed, except in the cause of religion,
was considered displeasing to the supernatural powers, probably because
blood was _par excellence_ the divine offering.

_Ceh._ No festival is recorded.

_Mac._ A ceremony was held by those more advanced in life to the
Chac, fertility gods, associated with Itzamna. A large fire was lit in
the temple court, into which were cast the hearts of various animal
sacrifices, lions, tigers and crocodiles. If animals of this size
could not be obtained, imitation hearts, formed of copal, were offered
instead. The Chac priests then quenched the fire with water, a ceremony
which, by imitative magic, was supposed to ensure a good rainfall.

_Kankin._ No festival mentioned.

_Muan._ The proprietors of cacao plantations held a festival to
their patrons, the Chac, Hobnil and Ekchuah, sacrificing a dog with a
cacao-coloured patch and making other offerings, including feathers. At
the ensuing feast not more than three cups of wine might be drunk by
the participators.

_Pax._ During this month a ceremony took place which was supposed
to bring good luck in warfare. The priests and lords of the provincial
towns assembled at the capital and passed five nights in prayer in the
temple of the god Cit-chac-coh, together with the Nacon who was carried
thither in divine state amidst clouds of incense. After this the
populace at large joined in the proceedings, a fire-sacrifice, similar
to that in Mac, was made, and the Nacon was carried round the temple. A
dog was then sacrificed by the Chac, and its heart was offered between
two plates, and after each of these officials had broken a vessel
containing wine, a feast took place at which only the Nacon remained
sober.

After this month no great festival was held until the new-year
ceremonies, but various minor local feasts were celebrated, and a great
deal of time was spent in eating and drinking.

The later Yucatec, we are told, were in the habit of setting up a
“stone” to commemorate the commencement (or the end) of a katun (period
of 7200 days, or 100 days less than 20 years). It is possible that
this was a custom inherited from the earlier Maya, and if so it seems
likely that the latter performed the ceremony every katun quarter.
Certainly a large number of the stelæ, especially at Quirigua, bear
initial dates of katun quarters, but there are also many to which
this supposition cannot apply, and which must have served to mark
some other occasion. It is certain that these stelæ were objects of
worship, since in nearly every case an altar is found in front of each
on which, presumably, offerings were made. Apart from the calendrical
feasts, the Yucatec practised two interesting ceremonies, one of which
was performed over children of about three years of age, and was known
by a name signifying “to be reborn.” A lucky day was selected, and
four Chac were chosen to assist the priest. The ceremony took place
in a house which was purified for the occasion; the Chacs sat at each
corner, holding cords enclosing the children and their fathers, the
latter having fasted for three days; and the priest sat in the centre
with a brazier and incense mixed with maize-meal. The boys wore a
white head-ornament, and the girls a shell suspended from a girdle;
each advanced in turn and offered meal and incense, receiving it from
the priest. The cord, brazier and a vessel of wine were then given
to a man to carry outside the village, and it was supposed that in
this way evil was expelled from the house. The priest then assumed a
tunic of feathers, chiefly red, with cotton streamers, and a feather
head-dress (possibly similar to the costume shown on Fig. 82; p. 344),
and held in his hand a brush made of serpent-tails. The heads of the
children were covered with cotton cloths, and a bone was passed nine
times over the forehead of each and dipped in a vessel of water with
which their brows, faces and the interstices of their fingers and toes
were anointed. This water had been procured from hollow tree-stumps or
mountain pools, and contained certain flowers and cacao. This part of
the ceremony evidently possessed a purificatory significance, while the
next act seems to signify, as far as the boys were concerned, the entry
into boyhood. Their head-ornaments were removed by the priest with a
stone knife, and an assistant followed with a handful of flowers and
a pipe, handing them to each of the candidates in turn, the bouquet
to smell and the pipe to smoke, making at the same time nine passes
with them before the face of each. The mothers removed the shell
ornament from the girls, who from this time were considered eligible
for betrothal; and after several minor ceremonies, including the
distribution of gifts among the chief actors, the function was over.
The other ceremony, to which allusion is made above, consisted in the
confession of sins, similar to, but less elaborate than, that practised
by the Mexicans. It was believed that absolution could be given only
once, and for this reason it was usually deferred until the penitent
was seriously ill. The confession was made to a priest, if the services
of one could be obtained, or else to a near relation, husband, wife,
father or mother.

Of Kakchiquel ritual little is known; they, and also the Tzental,
observed eighteen months of twenty days, and brought the year up to
365 by the addition of five extra days, just as the Maya and Mexicans.
Some, at any rate, of their ceremonies appear to have been connected
with the tonalamatl count, since we are told that in early times
offerings of fresh incense, green branches and bark were made on each
seventh and thirteenth day, and a “cat, the image of night,” was burned
before the god. We are also informed that this was before the “worship
of the idol of the great Chay Abah was begun.” However, various rites
in connection with agriculture were practised, such as fasting before
sowing, and the offering of incense at each of the corners of the
fields.

In later Yucatan, pilgrimages were made from all parts of the country
to important shrines, and we are told that the temple at Cozumel was
one of the most celebrated at the conquest. Pilgrims were wont to stop
to offer incense at deserted temples, and Cogolludo mentions the fact
that he found recent offerings of copal in a temple at Uxmal. The
present-day Lacandons also offer incense at the ruins, in the belief
that they are haunted by the ghosts of their forefathers. Divination
formed an important part of a priest’s duties, and it was principally
for this purpose that the tonalamatl was employed in Yucatan. Thus at
the birth of a child its horoscope was cast to determine its future
profession. The Kakchiquel too practised divination, not only by means
of the tonalamatl, but also with maize-grains, as the Mexicans. They
also used blocks of polished obsidian for scrying, one of which was
enshrined in a particularly celebrated temple, whither state messengers
were sent to consult it on important occasions. Obsidian was supposed
to have been produced in Xibalba at the creation, to be the “sustainer”
of mankind, probably as the source from which the will of heaven could
be ascertained. Maize was also employed for divination in Yucatan, and
omens were taken from dreams and the voices of birds. Various minor
superstitions were found, of which a few have been recorded. Thus if
a man on a journey stumbled over a stone, many of which were placed
at the commencement of a road, he made an offering of a green branch
to it, and rubbed his knees with a pebble to prevent fatigue. If a
traveller feared he might be late in arriving at his destination, he
placed a stone in a tree to stay the course of the sun, or plucked out
hairs from his eyebrows and blew them towards the heavens. In eclipses,
dogs were pinched to make them howl, and a noise was made by striking
the doors or furniture of the huts. An eclipse of the moon was supposed
to betoken that the luminary was dying, or was being bitten by ants.
The offering of eyebrows, and the pinching of the dogs during an
eclipse, were also practised in Peru.

Many of the rites of the present-day Lacandons are survivals of the
original worship. It has already been said that they are in the habit
of making pilgrimages to ruined sites for the purpose of offering
incense; the censers are rude clay bowls, with a mask-like face
attached, and each is reserved for a particular god whose image is
usually kept within it. The images are of stone and are kept hidden,
and inherited from father to son. The censers are renewed at the
harvest, the old ones are considered “dead” and left in the ruins. For
the manufacture of the new censers, as for the preparation of fresh
idols among the early Yucatec, a special hut is built, new fire is made
at which incense is kindled in them for the first time, and blood,
drawn from the ears of the worshippers with a stone knife, is smeared
upon the images of the gods. They also observe a “baptismal” rite, at
which a priest singes the hair of the candidates with six miniature
torches of pitchpine and confers a name upon them. The torches are then
smeared with blood and burnt, together with incense, in the idol house.
Confession is made to the cacique, or local chief, if a member of the
community is seriously ill, and the penitent believes that some sin of
his commission may be the cause. A lightning-god is still worshipped,
and in the Uloa valley Gordon came upon the tradition of a golden
dragon, believed to inhabit a particular pool, to which offerings were
made in former times, but which has withdrawn itself from human view
since the Spanish conquest, though it still controls the clouds and
rain. It is highly probable that many other interesting and important
survivals might be discovered among the present population, but owing
to their extreme reticence on such subjects the task is by no means
easy. However, the district offers a good field to a student of
folklore who is inclined to devote considerable time to the collection
of these relics of a former religion, though he must certainly be
gifted with an unusual degree of perseverance and patience.




             CHAPTER XI--THE MAYA: BURIAL, SOCIAL SYSTEM,
                             TRADE AND WAR


As regards the disposal of the dead, we find the same two methods
current among the historical Maya as were practised by the Aztec,
viz. inhumation and cremation. The first was that most commonly
observed among the generality of the inhabitants. Death was supposed
to be due to some evil spirit, and the friends and relations of the
deceased mourned for several days, by day in silence, at night with
lamentations, and the bereaved husband or wife observed a fast. The
corpse was enveloped in wrappings, the mouth filled with maize-meal
and currency-stones for use in the future life, and burial took place
in or behind the house. The house was usually abandoned, through
fear of the dead, unless a number of individuals were living there
together and consequently felt less nervous of the departed spirit.
The personal idols of a man were buried with him, and, in the case
of a priest, certain of his religious books also. Upon the latter
fact rests the hope that more of the precious manuscripts may yet be
discovered. Individuals of high rank were burned, and their ashes
deposited in large urns or in cavities in the heads of wooden figures
carved for the purpose. In the latter case only a portion of the ashes
were so preserved, the rest being buried. It is said that it was
customary to remove the heads of princes of the house of Cocom, and
to attach the facial portion of the skull, made up with artificial
features, to a statue which was kept in a private oratory, while the
ashes of high-priests were preserved in figures of pottery. Thus it is
evident that simple inhumation was characteristic of the lower orders,
cremation of the superior; and it is possible that the two methods
may represent two separate cultural elements, since there is reason
to believe that the ruling class belonged to a later immigration and
were the introducers of certain Mexican practices and beliefs into the
country. It seems possible that some form of cremation was practised
also by the Kakchiquel, since we are told that the “ashes” of great
men were mixed with the clay from which household idols were made; but
among this people also cremation may have been reserved for the ruling
class, since Fuentes states that at death the body lay in state for two
days and was then buried in a jar, omitting any reference to cremation.
It is possible that the term “ashes” may refer only to certain portions
of the body, and need not be taken to imply the practice of burning
the corpse; at any rate Gagavitz, the first Kakchiquel ruler, is
said to have been simply buried. Leon states that a high-priest was
buried in his house, seated upon his chair. The excavatory evidence,
though at present very deficient, seems to point to the conclusion
that cremation was a late practice among the Maya peoples. At Copan a
number of burials have been discovered, in which the position of the
bones implies that the body was arranged in a contracted position,
recumbent or sitting. Stone-lined cists have been found as depositories
for the dead sporadically from Quen Santo, through Alta Vera Paz to
Copan and Benque Viejo; but beyond, in the Uloa valley, large burial
sites have been discovered in which the bodies have been simply laid
in the earth. In Sacchana both extended and contracted burials have
been found, and in the Quiché country bones have been discovered in
such a position as to imply that the body was arranged in a seated
position on a pottery dish. British Honduras shows several styles of
burial, and our information is due almost solely to the excavations
made by Dr. Gann. About eighty miles from the coast on the Old River,
he found cist-burials, as mentioned above, urn-burials, in which the
bones were partly cremated, and burials both in a recumbent and in
a seated position. From the remains associated with the bones it is
evident that the cist-burials, both here and elsewhere in British
Honduras, contained the bodies of men of higher rank. At all the sites
mentioned above burials were found marked by mounds, but the presence
of the latter is not invariable, and it may be that as excavation
proceeds many cemeteries will be found of which no indications exist
upon the surface. At a site on the Rio Hondo, Dr. Gann was able to
distinguish between three distinct types of burial. The poorest graves
were found associated in some numbers in large flat mounds, sometimes
half an acre in extent; the bodies were contracted, and the grave
objects included hammer-stones, beads of clay and shell, rude weapons
and unburnished pottery. A better class of interment occurred singly,
in separate conical mounds of limestone blocks and dust, about 18 feet
high, with finer pottery and beads of stone; in these the bodies were
also contracted, and sometimes arranged head downwards. The finest
graves were cist-burials, each in a separate mound from twenty to fifty
feet high; in these the body lay at full length, and the associated
objects included fine painted vases, beads of jadeite, pearl-shell and
obsidian, and finely flaked stone implements. In Yucatan, burials have
occasionally been found in the so-called “chultunes,” or stone-lined
cisterns used by the former inhabitants; and human remains, some
suggesting cremation, have been discovered in the caves. The evidence
respecting the latter, however, seems to suggest that these caves
were not inhabited at an early period, and that the human occupation
did not last for any length of time; it is probable that they were
used only as places of refuge. On the whole such information as we
possess concerning the methods of disposal of the dead seems to imply
that burial was practised by the early Maya, and that cremation was
introduced by certain of those peoples who are definitely known to
be immigrants into the country at a date, as I hope to show shortly,
posterior to the building of the monuments (with the exception of the
later constructions at Chichen Itza).

At the discovery, the rule in Yucatan was divided among a number of
princely houses who constituted a sort of feudal nobility. A chief was
succeeded by his son, though his brothers ranked high and possessed
much influence. The rulers governed their territory through sub-chiefs
appointed in the outlying villages, who consulted them on all important
matters, such interviews usually taking place at night. They maintained
considerable state, being accompanied by a retinue when they left their
residences, and etiquette enjoined that all visitors should bring some
ceremonial present when they approached their overlord. This apart from
the ordinary tribute of cotton tunics, game, cacao and personal service
(such as house-building) which constituted the princely revenue. The
scene on the vase shown in Pl. XXIV; p. 310, appears to represent an
interview between a chief and a subject; the former is seated on a
daïs, while the latter presents to him an object which is probably a
pouch containing copal. Similar pouches are seen on the reliefs and
in the manuscripts. Inheritance among petty chiefs followed Mexican
lines, that is to say a petty chief was succeeded by his brothers in
order of age, and his sons only came to power after the death of their
paternal uncles. At an earlier period the various chieftains had been
subjects of an overlord at Mayapan, to whom all paid tribute. The
city was founded, according to tradition, by the descendants of the
Tutul Xiu, now called the Itza, whose protecting deity was Kukulkan
(in his later and degraded manifestation). The family of the Cocomes,
however, seem to have gained the supreme power, but in any case the
government was for a time centralized. The tributary lords possessed
residences at the capital which were under the charge of intendants
appointed by them, and were supported by their respective provinces;
the inhabitants of the actual district of Mayapan were exempt from
tribute, but the members of the aristocracy served in the temples,
assisting in the festivals by day and night. Eventually, however, the
centrifugal tendency so characteristic of Mexican and Central American
politics reasserted itself, and the “league” split up into a number of
independent, and often hostile, princelings. It is probable that each
important group of ruins marks the site of some former centre of power,
and the buildings not definitely associated with religion may have been
in part the residences of feudal lords.

But though the formation of the Mayapan “league” seems to indicate the
paramountcy of the secular power, the priestly caste, as in Mexico,
must always have possessed enormous influence, and the early traditions
seem to imply that they were the actual directors of tribal policy.
Kukulkan and Itzamna are both mentioned as leaders of migrations, and
from this it is fair to infer that the latter were directed by the
priests of the gods. Little indication as to the _insignia_ of
the early chiefs can be gleaned from the monuments, though the later
reliefs of Chichen Itza show many figures bearing a diadem of Mexican
pattern. It is, in fact, almost impossible to distinguish between
priests and rulers, and this very difficulty may perhaps be taken to
imply that the rule had a religious basis. Possibly some of the armed
figures may be taken to represent secular chieftains, but the arms
themselves seem to be rather of a ceremonial nature, and at some sites,
notably Copan, armed figures do not occur at all, while at Quirigua
and Palenque the only weapon is the axe, which seems to be purely a
religious emblem. The presence of subsidiary figures interpreted as
prisoners may be thought perhaps to indicate secular might, but these
only occur in any numbers at Naranjo. On the whole it seems reasonable
to conclude that the early Maya lived under the sway of rulers in whom
the priestly aspect predominated, and that the election of chiefs whose
power rested on a secular basis was a later development.

In the Popol Vuh even clearer indications of this are given, and it
is evident that the authority of Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Agab, Mahucutah
and Iqi-Balam rested on the fact that they were the guardians and
high-priests of the gods given to them at Tulan. The association
between priest and god in this case seems to have been personal and
not transferable, for their sons do not immediately succeed to their
positions. In fact, the legend seems to indicate the substitution of a
more secular form of authority, since the titles and _insignia_
of power are sought and obtained from a people living to the east,
though these titles and _insignia_, not unnaturally, are conferred
upon the elder sons of the deceased leaders. The titles include that
of Ahpop, afterwards held by supreme chiefs, and the _insignia_
consist of canopy, throne, musical instruments, pigments, perfumes,
animal head-dresses, heron-plumes and shell and other ornaments,
many of which appear in the livery worn by the figures sculptured on
the early Maya monuments. The power of the rulers grew, centres of
authority, similar to Mayapan, but probably on a smaller scale, were
formed, and tribute of gems, gold, feathers and honey was imposed
upon the conquered tribes. In particular we are told that the ruling
people grew rich upon the bride-prices paid by the suitors of their
women, and it may be concluded that alliances with a princely house
were as much sought in Guatemala as in Mexico, and that the belief,
that rank could only be conferred by an individual in whose blood it
was inherent, was equally prevalent. The Popol Vuh gives a list of the
principal officers of the Quiché state, and those of the Cavek division
are quoted below. Nothing is known concerning them save the probable
translation of the titles, but they will serve to indicate the nature
of the Quiché constitution, which may well have been founded on some
system prevailing among the earlier Maya. The translations are those of
Brinton.

Ahau-Ahpop, the ruler.

Ahau-Ahpop-Camha, possibly the sub-chief of the Tziquinaha.

Ah-Tohil, the high-priest of Tohil.

Ah-Gukumatz, the high-priest of Gukumatz.

Nim-Chokoh-Cavek, the heir of the first.

Popol-Vinak-Chituy, the high councillor of Chituy.

Lolmet-Quehney, the overseer of tribute.

Popol-Vinak-Pa-Hom-Tzalatz, the councillor of the ball-game.

Uchuch-Camha, the high steward.

In a later passage a functionary called Tepeu-Yaqui, who may have been
the chief sacrificer, is substituted for the last. All these officials
are described as “lords of great houses.” The other divisions of the
Quiché were organized on similar principles.

In the same way the Kakchiquel appear to have commenced their migration
under priestly guidance; at any rate the election of the first ruler
comes at a late period in their “annals.” The _insignia_ of power
seem to have been the same; the electors say, “Thou shalt be the first
man among the Ahpo-Xahil and among the Ahpo-Zotzil.... We will give
to thee the canopy, the royal seat, the mat, the throne, with power
over men.” The enthronement of a later ruler is described as follows:
“They seated him on the seat ... washed him in the bath, the painted
vessel ... clothed him with the robe and the green ornaments; he
received the colours, the yellow stone, the pigment, the red earth.”
Later the Kakchiquel were ruled by a dual chieftainship, representing
the two chief tribes, the Zotzil and Xahil. The Zotzil chief was
called Ahpo-Zotzil, the Xahil chief Ahpo-Xahil, and the senior in
office was regarded as paramount. Their heirs held respectively the
title of Ahpop-Qamahay and Galel-Xahil, and they were supported by an
hereditary aristocracy and a number of officials like those of the
Quiché. Besides the mat, the canopy was an important _insigne_
of rank, that of the rulers being triple, of the heirs double, and of
the highest officials single. The populace was divided into warriors,
freemen, tributaries and slaves, and there was also a clan system,
similar to that of the Mexican calpulli, though based on relationship
rather than on locality. The clans were called chinamitl, and were
represented by officials called Ahtzalam, a word translated by Brinton
as “Keeper of the tablets”; besides allusions to the clans, there
are frequent references to seven cities and to thirteen divisions or
provinces. The Kakchiquel were never a large or very important people,
and their position among other tribes seems to have varied a good deal
at different periods of their history. At times they seem to have paid
tribute to the Quiché, though at the conquest they were independent,
while at other times they appear to have been able to extract tribute
from some of the surrounding nations. Such tribute consisted of gold
and silver, worked or unworked, engraved stones, feathers and cacao.

Of the land system among the Maya we know very little. No doubt, owing
to the comparative sparseness of the population and the fertility of
the climate, the land question had not attained the same importance
as in Mexico. In Yucatan at any rate land was common property,
and sufficient for the needs of each family was assigned to its
representative by the chiefs. The salt deposits on the coast were also
common, but were worked by the inhabitants of the locality who paid
their tribute in salt.

Little, too, is known of the judicial arrangements; official advocates
and a kind of police existed, and important cases in provincial
villages were referred to the overlords, whose power was absolute.
In the case of minor offences, the local chief had jurisdiction,
and if the parties belonged to different villages, the chief of the
offender’s village would send satisfaction to the other, or else strife
resulted. For many offences, even homicide if accidental, compensation
was possible, and the relations of the guilty person would assist
him in paying the fine, though the right of retaliation in cases of
manslaughter lay with the relations of the deceased. If the injury
were obviously malicious, the question was rarely settled without
the parties coming to blows. For theft the culprit was compelled
to restore the plunder, and if he could not he was enslaved; thus
the number of slaves in the community was considerably increased in
times of famine, for nearly all cases of stealing were connected with
food. Captives of lower rank also became slaves, but any slave might
redeem himself, though children born in slavery remained slaves until
compensation was paid to their owners. Slaves could be sold, but if
one died or escaped soon after his purchase, part of the price paid
for him could be reclaimed. The robbing of a minor was considered a
particularly disgraceful offence. In ordinary cases a man’s property
was divided among his sons, those who had contributed most towards its
increase receiving a larger share. Daughters had no right to any of
the inheritance, though they were usually given a portion. If there
were no sons, the property went to the nearest male relations, but if
the sons were still young, guardians were appointed to provide the
mother with the necessaries for their education. The arrangements were
made in the presence of the local chief and the principal men of the
place, and any dishonesty on the part of the guardians involved them in
infamy; however, we are told that the system was the cause of frequent
quarrels. Matrimonial cases were not infrequent, but the punishment was
severe; the male culprit was tied to a post in the chief’s quarter and
handed over to the injured husband, who might accept compensation, or
take his revenge by smashing the head of his supplanter with a stone.
The woman incurred perpetual obloquy, no light punishment, and was
usually divorced by her husband. Among the Kakchiquel we read of an
execution by fastening a prisoner to a tree and shooting at him with
arrows, while among the Tzutuhil of Atitlan hanging and quartering were
practised. At the latter locality the chief would send a relation to
enquire into offences committed in outlying villages; his decision was
without appeal, and in cases involving a fine he received one-half as
payment for his services. It is probable that similar systems prevailed
generally among the Quiché and Kakchiquel.

There was no special education for the young as in Mexico, at least as
far as our knowledge goes, apart from the training given to candidates
for the priesthood. Children were taught to have great respect for
their elders, and the young and unmarried associated little with
the latter. The distinction between bachelors and married men was
emphasized by the existence of a communal house where the former
congregated for amusement and where, as a rule, they slept.

The Maya preserved their genealogies, and great pride was taken in
descent from one of the Mayapan houses. Men bore, in addition to a
personal name, the names also of their father and mother. In this way
a system of surnames grew up, and community of name was taken to imply
community of blood; so much so, in fact, that all over the country a
traveller on reaching a strange village would mention his name and
immediately be welcomed and entertained as a relation by anyone who
happened to bear the same name. As a general rule travellers were well
treated, and many of the village chiefs kept open house, a custom which
lasted on well into the days of the Spanish _régime_, as many poor
white voyagers found to their advantage. The priests were the guardians
of family tradition and genealogies. Similar surnames existed among the
Kakchiquel, and each person bore, besides his personal name, the name
of his clan or chinamitl.

As regards marriage, Landa states that the Maya in former times
regarded twenty as a suitable age, but that the tendency in his time
was to marry much younger. According to most authorities, the Maya
were monogamous, but one states that polygyny was permitted. Probably
a plurality of wives was exceptional and limited to chiefs. As in
Mexico, a man never sought a wife for himself, but his father employed
the services of a go-between. Marriage was not allowed with a deceased
wife’s sister or husband’s brother, and no unions might be contracted
between persons bearing the same name, since community of name implied
blood-relationship. Further, a man might not marry his maternal aunt.
The occasion of the marriage, which was performed by a priest, was
celebrated by a banquet in the house of the bride’s father, and the
husband remained and worked for his wife’s family for five or six
years. Marriage was by purchase, that is to say the man’s parents
handed over certain property to the father-in-law, but the presents
were not of great value, the real price being the personal service
contributed by the bridegroom. We are told that divorce was both easy
and frequent.

A somewhat similar system prevails to-day among the Lacandons, though
the young man demands his wife in person. If her parents agree, the
couple live as man and wife in the house of her father for a year
on trial. At the end of the year, the couple, their relations and
friends, paint themselves and assume their best ornaments; the bride
presents her husband with a stool and five cacao grains, and receives
from him a skirt and five cacao grains. Their hands are then joined by
the cacique, and a feast follows. The Lacandons are monogamous, and
divorce, probably owing to the system of trial-marriage, is rare.

Among the Quiché also marriage was by purchase, but the bride-price
was a serious matter, and apparently often amounted to a considerable
sum. We are told that the princes grew rich on the gifts which they
received in return for their daughters, but the system brought abuses
with it, and quarrels arose which became so frequent and serious that
the tribe split up into nine “families” and twenty-four “great houses.”
The tendency to matriarchy seen among the Maya is even more evident
among the Kakchiquel, since if the couple belonged to different clans
(chinamitl), the man regarded all the male members of his wife’s clan
as either brothers- or sons-in-law, according to age. This would seem
to imply that the man passed into his wife’s clan rather than she into
his.

Commerce flourished among the later Maya, and there was a good deal of
travelling to and fro in the country. The pilgrimages to celebrated
shrines along recognized routes have already been mentioned, and
also the fact that there was a particular god of travel, Ekchuah.
The Yucatec traded salt, textiles and slaves to Uloa and Tabasco, in
exchange for cacao and stone money; red shells were imported, and also
copper from New Spain. Diaz mentions that the Spaniards found, in a
village in Chiapas, a number of prisoners secured by wooden collars who
had been captured on the road, and he states that some of these were
travellers from Tehuantepec and Soconusco. On the border of Yucatan
and in the hilly region of Alta Vera Paz there were well-defined
trade-routes, and Cortés after crossing the Usumacinta came to a
district, which he calls Acalan, where the inhabitants maintained
trade-intercourse, mainly by boat, with Tabasco, and had trade-outposts
on the Golfo Dulce and the Honduras border. In the earliest times there
must have been much extended intercourse among the tribes, at any rate
pendants of sea-shells constitute one of the most frequent ornaments
seen on the monuments, and the Quiché seem to have sent an expedition
on a long journey to obtain royal _insignia_, as mentioned above.
Much of the trade was performed by direct exchange, but there were
certain forms of currency. Cacao formed the “small change,” and Herrera
states that 200 of the nuts went to a _real_. Red shells and stone
counters are also mentioned as money, as well as copper bells, the
value of which depended on their size. Both Cogolludo and Torquemada
speak of copper currency axe-blades, very thin and in the form of an
inverted T, which were imported from Mexico. The latter author states
that four of these, if new, were equivalent to five _reales_, but
that damaged specimens were only valuable for melting down and went at
ten to the _real_. Feathers were also employed as currency, and
in some places cloth, as in Mexico. The system of enumeration employed
in commerce was in the main vigesimal. The count proceeded by fives to
twenty, by twenties to one hundred, and by hundreds to four hundred;
from this point the higher numbers were reckoned in multiples of twenty.

  [Illustration: FIG. 60.--Detail from the relief in
  the great tlaxtli-court at Chichen Itza.

  (_After Seler_)]

The question of war and weapons is particularly interesting from
archæological and ethnological points of view. Taken as a whole the
monuments show few traces of military activity, and at some sites,
notably Copan, Quirigua and Palenque, armed figures are not seen at
all, for the axe which appears at the two latter sites is obviously
a purely ceremonial object. To omit Yucatan for the moment, it is
worthy of notice that reliefs suggesting the figures of warriors are
practically only found in the northern portion of the region over which
the earlier remains extend, viz. at Piedras Negras, Menché, Naranjo
and Tikal. The suggestion is conveyed by the presence of one or more
bound figures subsidiary to the main personage represented upon the
sculpture, or by the fact that the latter stands upon a crouching
figure of distinctly different, and far lower, type of physiognomy.
Tikal may almost be omitted from the above list, since only one such
relief occurs, and it resembles rather the sculptures of Menché than
the archaic stelæ which appear to be more characteristic of the site.
It is not absolutely certain, moreover, that the crouching figures
which serve as supporters represent actual prisoners, since in some
cases the main figure is shown with attributes which are of a purely
ceremonial nature; still the arrangement is suggestive, and it is
worthy of notice that by far the largest number of such stelæ is found
at Naranjo. Where the main figure is shown with a weapon, that weapon
is almost invariably a spear with a head of flaked stone. Such spears
are always rather elaborate and ornamental in form, and in some cases
it is difficult to distinguish them from a ceremonial staff. As stated
above, I do not think that the ceremonial axe can fairly be considered
a weapon, but one “axe” is shown in the hands of a figure at Menché
(stela II), which seems to answer to the description of the “swords”
seen by Columbus in Ruatan. The latter consisted of an edging of stone
flakes set in a groove in a wooden haft, and secured by lashing of
fish intestines. Shields are shown at most sites, and conform in the
main to two types, square and round (or four-sided with gently rounded
corners). Square shields are seen at Piedras Negras, the other pattern
at Menché, Copan, Quirigua, and Naranjo, though at the last-named site
one rectangular shield occurs. At Piedras Negras and Menché figures are
found carrying objects which I take to be long shields of some pliable
material, and these are paralleled in the reliefs on the ball-court at
Chichen Itza (Fig. 60). It is worthy of note that both Diaz and Diego
de Godoi mention long shields, covering most of the body, which could
be folded or rolled up and carried under the arm when not required,
as in use among the tribes of Chiapas. The shields of the rounded
type nearly always bear on the field a highly ornamental sun-face
(Fig. 82; p. 344). It should be observed that neither bows, arrows,
spear-throwers nor, apparently, slings are figured on the monuments
of the central region. On the whole it seems fair to conclude that
the early Maya were men of peace, and that wars, when they occurred,
were with the border tribes rather than among themselves; it should
be mentioned that one representation of bound prisoners is found at
Ixkun. When we come to consider Yucatan, we find that reliefs showing
figures are practically absent except at Chichen Itza, and there they
occur only on buildings ornamented in a distinctly later style, and
accompanied by glyphs of a non-Maya character. In the famous relief on
the ball-court (Fig. 60) is a long series of figures carrying a variety
of weapons, chiefly spears of the type mentioned above, wooden lances
with a single or double row of barbs, apparently cut from the solid,
sheaves of light throwing-spears with stone heads and, seemingly,
feathered butts, and spear-throwers of wood ornamented with feathers.
Light bucklers of a circular pattern, and long pliable shields of the
type mentioned before, both occur, but bows are absent. Other forms
of defensive armour seem to be lacking on the whole, but there is one
figure shown with a turtle-shell worn as a corslet. This may have some
mythological significance, but it is worth recording in this connection
that Diaz mentions turtle-carapaces used as shields at Ayagualulco, to
the west of the river Tabasco. Many of the figures wear a flat circular
object fastened to the girdle at the hip; this may possibly be the
leather pad worn in the ball-game, as described on p. 166, but more
likely it corresponds to the circular ornament which formed part of
the military uniform of the Huaxtec warriors. Now spear-throwers and
darts appear on the Dresden codex, but the absence, on the earlier
monuments, of anything remotely resembling either a spear-thrower or a
spear which could be hurled, seems to suggest that their builders were
ignorant of missile weapons. Chichen Itza, of which the late buildings
are, to anticipate, in Toltec style, was intimately associated with the
Tutul Xiu, and we are told that the spear-thrower was their principal
weapon. Further, Landa makes the statement that bows and arrows, which
were universal in Yucatan at the conquest, were introduced there by the
Mexicans, and that the Yucatec before they came into contact with the
latter were ignorant of these weapons. It may be conjectured that their
introduction was due to the Mexican mercenaries employed by the later
rulers of Mayapan. To turn for the moment to the Quiché and Kakchiquel,
we find that “arrows” were employed by the former in their wars with
the surrounding tribes shortly after the death of the original leaders,
but it is possible that these may in reality have been throwing-spears.
With regard to the Kakchiquel the case is different; this people are
always, in the Annals of Xahila, insisting upon their status as a
warrior tribe, and it is stated definitely that the only riches which
their fighting-men bore with them from Tulan were their bows, their
bucklers and their rounded shields. Now both the Tutul Xiu and the
Quiché traced their origin from Tulan also, and if this be taken to
indicate some early contact with the Mexican valley, it follows that
the Tutul Xiu migration started before the introduction of the bow into
the valley by the Chichimec, while that of the Quiché and Kakchiquel
occurred subsequently. However, as stated above, the Tulan of the Tutul
Xiu tradition is not necessarily that of the Quiché and Kakchiquel
legends (see pp. 214–216).

According to Landa the bows of the historical Yucatec were solid and
straight, a little less than a man’s height, while the arrows, carried
in a quiver, had shafts of reed, foreshafts of wood and obsidian
heads; the Yucatec also carried stone-headed spears, copper-bladed
axes, the edges of which were hardened by hammering, and basket-work
shields covered with deer-hide. The spear remained the weapon of the
upper class, while the bow, as the arm of the mercenary, was used by
the commoners. Corslets, quilted with cotton and salt, are mentioned
as defensive armour, and Diaz speaks of slings and “swords” (probably
corresponding to the Mexican macquauitl) at Cape Cotoche and Champoton
respectively. The Maya forces were under the command of two generals,
one elected for three years and called Nacon (see p. 259), the other
hereditary. The generals maintained a force of regular soldiers, whose
food in times of peace was provided by the commune. Palisades were
practically the only defensive works known, and in fact very few of
the buildings throughout the Maya country, with the exception of a few
in western Guatemala, where traces of fortifications are seen on the
summits of mountains, seem adapted for defensive purposes. The Yucatec
carried off the jaw-bones of slain foes to be worn as armlets, a custom
also found in New Guinea. Axes and clubs were used by the Quiché and
Kakchiquel, and the latter also employed slings and blow-guns. In
later Guatemala mention is made by Alvarado of long wadded corslets
of cotton, three fingers thick and so cumbrous that, when the wearers
fell in attempting to escape from the Spanish attack, they could not
rise without assistance. A peculiar weapon mentioned in the Popol Vuh,
as used by the Quiché in the defence of a fortress, consisted of a
kind of bomb, formed of a gourd filled with live hornets; it is stated
that by means of this ingenious weapon they succeeded in repelling
an attack upon a fortified settlement. A good description of a fight
between the Quiché and the Kakchiquel is given in the “Annals.” “When
the dawn appeared, the Quiché descended from the hills, the cries
and the shouts of war broke forth, the banners were displayed. Then
were heard the drums, the trumpets and the conches of the combatants.
Truly this descent of the Quiché was terrible. They advanced rapidly
in rank, and one might see afar off their bands following one another
descending the mountain. They soon reached the bank of the river, the
houses by the water. They were followed by the chiefs Tepepul and
Iztayul, accompanying the god. Then it was that the battalions met.
Truly the encounter was terrible. The cries and the shouts, the noise
of the drums, the trumpets and the conches resounded, mingled with the
enchantments of the heroes. The Quiché were routed in all directions,
not one resisted, they were put to flight and delivered over to death
and no one could count their slain. A great number of them were taken
prisoner, together with the kings Tepepul and Iztayul, who delivered
up their god.” The capture of a god was evidently a feat much to be
desired, as we have seen when treating of the Mexicans (p. 56), and
there are passages in the Popol Vuh which relate the attempts made by
other tribes to capture the deities of the Quiché. Both the Quiché
and Kakchiquel seem to have been in the habit of executing prisoners
by the arrow-sacrifice, and the Yucatec also offered up captives
of rank, reducing those of lower status to slavery. Apart from the
attempts at capturing the enemy’s god, war did not have nearly so close
a connection with religion as in Mexico, at least as far as can be
ascertained. Most of the wars concerning which traditions have been
preserved either were dynastic or resulted from the refusal on the part
of a subject tribe to pay tribute.




          CHAPTER XII--THE MAYA: DRESS, DAILY LIFE AND CRAFTS


The historical Maya were of fair height and sturdy, qualities which
appear also upon the monuments. A peculiar appearance was given to
the head by the practice of cranial deformation which prevailed from
the earliest times. Boards were applied to the heads of infants so
that the forehead and occiput were flattened, and the crown assumed
in profile a “sugar-loaf” aspect. Individuals exhibiting this form
of distortion in a marked degree are shown in Figs. 49, 61, 82, and
Pls. XXII and XXIV, pp. 294 and 310. Cranial deformation is relatively
common in America, and the practice extended northwards along the
west coast, and southwards into Peru, but the Maya were peculiar in
considering a squint a mark of beauty. Landa states that the Yucatec
mothers were accustomed to suspend some small object from the forelock
of a child in order to produce the desired result. We have seen that
tooth-chipping was characteristic of the Huaxtec, Totonac and Mixtec
in Mexico, and that the Huaxtec and Mixtec were also accustomed to
ornament the teeth further by means of inlay. Both these practices
were widespread among the Maya. Allusion has already been made to the
chipped teeth which appear as attributes of the sun-god (see Fig. 72;
p. 316, and the cover-design), and it may now be mentioned that teeth
mutilated in exactly the same fashion have been found in burials at
Copan, in the Uloa valley, and in caves at Loltun. Teeth inlaid with
small circular plugs of jadeite have also been found at the first of
these sites. Tooth-filing was also practised by the later Yucatec,
by rubbing with a stone dipped in water. The ears and nose were pierced
and ornaments worn in the apertures. Plugs with long pendants were
carried in the ears, and the monuments and manuscripts show figures
with the lobes considerably lengthened by the weight of the ornaments
inserted in them (e.g. Pl. XXII; p. 294). In the nose a bar was worn,
of the same pattern as is occasionally seen in Totonac pottery (Pl.
XVIII, 5; p. 194). Sometimes the bar terminated each end in a long tuft
of feathers, as among the Huaxtec, and ornaments of this description
are common on the stelæ at Menché. The peculiar curved nose-ornament
associated with the sun-god has already been mentioned. As a rule the
ears of the men were much scarified from ceremonial blood-letting.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXII_

    _British Museum_

  MAYA

  STONE LINTEL FROM MENCHÉ, CHIAPAS

  (Scale: ⅛th)]

Paint was much used as a body-decoration by the historical Yucatec, red
being the favourite colour for women and married men; bachelors usually
painted themselves black. Pottery stamps are among the remains commonly
found throughout the Maya region, and no doubt some of these were used
to impress designs upon the body as in Mexico. Tatu was also practised,
and Landa states that the more ornamented a man was in this way, the
more respect he won from his associates. The decoration was usually
applied at marriage, the design being first painted on and then pricked
in. Women also covered the body with tatu from the waist upwards,
with the exception of the breasts. Probably the custom was of long
standing, since ornament simulating tatu is often seen on the faces of
the figures on the monuments. The Yucatec were fond of perfumes, and
the women were in the habit of rubbing the body with a pottery brick
impregnated with a sweet-smelling gum.

  [Illustration:

   FIG. 61.--Man in ceremonial costume, from a stone
   relief in the Temple of the Cross, Palenque.

  (_After Maudslay_)]

The men of Yucatan at any rate wore no hair on their faces in Spanish
times, and it is said that mothers scorched the faces of their
children with hot cloths in the belief that its growth was thereby
prevented. However, pottery fragments from Alta Vera Paz occasionally
show faces with a heavy moustache, and certain of the gods appear on
the manuscripts with beards. Bearded figures also occur on vases and
among the sculptures, notably at Quirigua. The hair was usually worn
long, and the priests in Guatemala had great difficulty in persuading
their converts to cut it. In Yucatan a patch was burnt short on the top
of the head, the rest of the hair being plaited and wound round the
head with the exception of a small tail behind. The women wore it in
two long plaits down the back. Head-ornaments existed in great variety
and were extremely elaborate among the men; brilliant feathers were
used in great profusion, and masks of animals or gods were frequently
added, if we may accept the evidence of the sculptures. Clothing itself
was made from textiles, and was usually assumed about the age of five
or six, children under that age going nude. The principal garment
worn by men was a girdle of about a hand’s breath, the ends falling
down before and behind (e.g. Figs. 61 and 82; pp. 297 and 344). These
ends were ornamented by the women with embroidery or feather-work,
and in the monuments they are shown furnished with the most elaborate
designs, of which the most frequent is a grotesque face, often highly
conventionalized, with long nose-ornaments, probably representing a
water-deity. Wide, square shoulder-mantles were also worn, as well as
sandals of plaited hemp or hide. The sandal-strings, again, were often
highly decorative, and in the monuments the sandal itself is of so
elaborate a nature that it may almost be said to be a shoe (Pl. XXII,
and Fig. 61). The manuscripts seem to show some sort of a leg-covering
also (e.g. Fig. 46, _e_). Women wore a skirt, and often covered
the upper portion of the body with a cloth or a tunic open at the
sides; the breast-cloth was worn at Campeche and Balcalar and tunics
elsewhere in Yucatan at the time of the conquest. It is possible that
the ceremonial dress of the men in early times included a skirt, for
it hardly seems probable that all the skirted figures in the monuments
represent women. Ornaments were worn in great variety, beads of
jadeite and other hard stone were strung as necklaces; masks, also of
stone, were worn as breast ornaments, and shells appeared as fringes
to the edges of garments. But the details of dress and ornaments can
be understood better from the illustrations than from any lengthy
description.

  [Illustration: FIG. 62.--A. Turkey in a trap.

  B. Hunter with deer.

  C. The black god making fire.

  D. Deer in a trap.

  E. Alligator in a deadfall.

  (_Troano-Cortesianus MS._)]

Agriculture was very important among the Maya, as may be judged from
the study of their religion. Maize and cacao constituted the most
important of the crops, but beans, yams and other food-plants were
also grown. Co-operative labour was employed in the preparation of
the fields, for weeding and for sowing, and the burnt weeds were
the only manure. Sowing took place at the commencement of the rainy
season; the sowers were furnished with a bag containing the grain
and a pointed stick with which they made holes in the ground for the
reception of the seed. The right-hand figure in the upper portion of
Fig. 59 is probably engaged in this occupation. The crop was stored
in specially constructed granaries. Maize was set to steep over night
in water mixed with lime, and was then pounded on stones and made up
into cakes, which lasted a long time and were soaked in water before
a meal when they became hard. Various kinds of bread were made,
most of which were eaten hot, as they were indigestible when cold.
Maize-meal was mixed with water to make a beverage, for water was not
usually drunk plain; a drink was also prepared from the roast grain
pounded and mixed with cacao and pepper. Much chocolate, prepared
as described on p. 155, was consumed, and mead was prepared from
honey to which an infusion of a certain root was added. For grinding
maize a flat stone, called in Mexico metatl, was used together with
an elongated stone rubber, circular or square in section, and often
with a marked flattening on the side which was most constantly in
use. At the present day the rubbers used in Mexico and in northern
Guatemala are heavy, and the ends project beyond the edges of the
metatl, so that they can be grasped by the user; in Peten, Alta Vera
Paz and south-eastern Guatemala, they are lighter, and shorter than
the breadth of the metatl. Rubbers of the first type, however, dating
from an early period, have been found in ruins in Alta Vera Paz. Flesh
food was not much eaten on ordinary occasions, but was reserved for
feasts. The Maya were good hunters, and organized communal drives
besides manufacturing various forms of traps, principally springes and
deadfalls (Fig. 62). The deer was the principal quarry, but various
animals were domesticated, including turkeys, geese and bees, and fish
was considered a great delicacy. For fishing, canoes were employed, of
the dug-out variety, and the inhabitants of the lower Usumacinta led
a semi-aquatic life. Between Yucatan and Tabasco is a large lagoon,
with many small islands, teeming with fish and bird-life; here the
navigation is very confusing, but the natives made their way from point
to point by the aid of signs which they placed in the trees. Large
canoes were constructed for use on the sea, propelled by oars and
sails, and one is mentioned as being seen in the neighbourhood of Cape
Cotoche large enough for a crew of forty men. In hunting and fishing,
when practised in common, a portion of the catch was reserved for the
lord and the rest was divided. One principal meal was taken during
the day, about an hour before sunset, and the hands and mouth were
washed afterwards; the women ate apart from the men. Most ceremonial
occasions were marked by a feast, and the Maya were rather given to
debauchery. The nobles frequently gave banquets, and the invited guests
were supposed to be under the obligation of returning the compliment
on some future occasion. Indeed, the debt was considered so binding,
that it became transferred to their heirs in the case of their death.
On such occasions the wine was handed by women, who turned their backs
while the guest drank, and at the end of the festivities each of those
present received a mantle as a gift, together with the cup from which
he had drunk. Invitations to a wedding-feast, or to a banquet held
in commemoration of some ancestor, involved no return invitation.
Tobacco-smoking seems to have been practised, since pipes have been
found in Guatemala, though only one is known to have been discovered
in Honduras. It would seem as if some form of dramatic performance
was occasionally given on festive occasions, since Landa speaks of
“comedians who gave representations with much grace,” but the principal
form of amusement was the dance, of which there were many varieties.
A number of musical instruments are shown in the manuscripts (Fig.
63) and mentioned in the early accounts. These include hollow gongs
of wood, sounded with rubber-headed beaters, which could be heard
over a distance of two leagues, drums of two types, gongs formed of
tortoise-carapaces, beaten with the hand, and rattles and rattle-staves
similar to the Mexican chicauaztli. Wind-instruments comprised
conches, several forms of trumpet, often with bell-mouths formed of
calabashes, bone and reed flutes and whistles. Small bells or rattles
of the “hawk-bell” pattern were often worn as ornaments.

  [Illustration: FIG. 63.--Priests with musical
  instruments.

    (_Dresden MS._)      (_After Seler_)]


As regards games, beans were thrown as dice, but the most interesting
amusement was the ball-game, called tlaxtli by the Mexicans, and played
in the same manner. In the Popol Vuh the outfit of the ball-player,
which the rat discovers for Hunahpu and Xbalanque, is said to consist
of “hip-shields, rings, gauntlets, crowns and helmets.” By far the
finest example of a tlaxtli-court known is at Chichen Itza, and the
semi-religious nature of the game is illustrated by the fact that a
temple is attached to it. Before a court could be used it was formally
consecrated; at midnight, on a lucky day, two idols, one of the game,
the other of the ball, were set up on the lower walls of the court,
and certain ceremonies took place, including the blessing of the court
itself. Finally the ball was thrown four times as in the game, and the
court was then considered consecrated and could be used by the players.
The game was played for stakes, such as a bundle of cotton cloths, gold
ornaments, or feathers, and a peculiar rule existed in accordance with
which the player who was fortunate enough to send the ball through
the ring, a feat which was but rarely performed, could claim all the
cloaks of the spectators. Now it is an interesting fact that remains
of tlaxtli-courts are not found elsewhere in the Maya country except
at Chacula and Alta Vera Paz in the west of Guatemala, where they are
exactly similar to those in the Zapotec region at Quiengola. Moreover,
the ball-court at Chichen Itza belongs to the later buildings, since
the temples attached to it are ornamented in Toltec style, the figures
do not exhibit head-deformation, and the reliefs include glyphs of a
non-Maya character. I think it is fair to assume that the game was not
played by the builders of the earlier monuments, but was introduced in
later times from Mexico. I believe that the Popol Vuh gives a hint of
its introduction. It will be remembered that the heroes Hun Hunahpu
and Vukub Hunahpu give offence to the people of Xibalba by playing the
game. “Their game is an insult to us,” are the words used, and they
are forthwith challenged to a contest. But before they are allowed
to engage in competition, they are submitted to a number of tests, a
fact which seems to indicate that they were called upon to prove their
acquaintance with certain mysteries peculiar to the tribe. Failing in
these, they are put to death without being permitted to engage in the
game. The idea that certain games are the property of certain tribes is
not unfamiliar to students of ethnography, especially in the case of
games which possess the ceremonial significance which is so noticeable
a feature of tlaxtli. The tests therefore which the lords of Xibalba
impose upon the heroes have the object of discovering whether the
latter possess the right to play the game which they claim, and it will
be remembered that the victory of Hunahpu and Xbalanque is in a sense
regarded as the capture of the tlaxtli-game, since they pronounce
sentence upon the defeated Xibalbans in the words “Your ball shall
not roll again in the ball-game.” Now Xibalba is evidently regarded
as an underworld, but the author of the Popol Vuh goes out of his way
to explain that the inhabitants are not gods. That being so, one’s
thoughts are immediately directed to the Mixtec or Zapotec country as
the site of Xibalba, since in this region alone certain localities were
definitely pointed out as the openings of the underworld. On the whole
I think the evidence suggests that the game found its way into the
Maya region after the abandonment of the earlier Maya cities, and as a
result of the migrations which the fall of Tulan set on foot. Further,
that it reached the Maya by two channels (and perhaps at different
times), i.e. Yucatan _via_ Vera Cruz and Tabasco, and north-west
Guatemala by way of Oaxaca. The presence of ruins strongly resembling
tlaxtli-courts in the Huaxtec territory is, I believe, due to later
influence emanating from the Mexican valley. Besides the presence of
the court at Chichen Itza, further evidence of the presence of the game
in the east is found in the Kakchiquel legends, where a related people
living far to the east, and almost certainly to be identified with the
Olmec, are called the “Ball-play and fish people.”

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXIII_

    _By permission of the Peabody Museum_

  MAYA

  STELA 24; NARANJO, GUATEMALA]

As regards habitations, no doubt the early inhabitants of the Maya
country lived, for the most part, in huts constructed of perishable
materials, and reserved the more permanent buildings for the service
of the gods and the use of the tribal chiefs. So close a similarity
does the present-day native house of Yucatan bear to the typical form
of Maya room as exemplified in the ruins, that it seems probable
that the early habitations did not differ essentially from those of
later times. The Yucatec house is a rectangular structure of wood and
leaves, with a gabled roof supported by a ridge-pole; it is usually
constructed on a raised foundation, which renders it considerably
cooler than if built upon the ground level, and the floor is mortared.
Like the early structures, it contains no windows. Landa describes the
houses of Yucatan in much the same terms, stating that the building
was divided by a longitudinal wall, pierced with doorways giving
access to small rooms used as sleeping apartments. The front was open,
and constituted the living and reception room, and in the houses of
chiefs, the walls, which were plastered, were ornamented with frescoes.
A certain amount of building in stone was carried on right up to the
conquest, though the buildings erected do not seem to have been either
as important or as ornamental as those of earlier date. Diaz mentions
stone-built habitations in Yucatan, and waxes enthusiastic over the
towns of Chiapas, which were of no great importance, a fact which goes
far to prove that the great sites such as Palenque were never visited
by the conquerors, and must have been even then deserted. The Quiché
and Kakchiquel were good builders in stone and lime, and an early and
somewhat high-flown description exists of their chief towns, Utatlan
and Iximché, though the ruins in that locality show clearly that the
chronicler’s imagination has completely run away with him. But on the
whole it may be concluded that the Maya, like the Mexicans, dedicated
their architectural masterpieces to the purposes of religion, and
lived for the most part in dwellings of a more temporary nature. The
population seems to have moved about a great deal, probably around the
religious centres distinguished by the more extensive ruins, and the
construction of elaborate dwellings would have been rather a waste of
time.

  [Illustration: FIG. 64.--Objects of flaked stone;
  British Honduras.

  (_British Museum_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 65.--Stone mask from Benque
  Viejo, British Honduras.]

Like the Mexicans, the Maya were living at the discovery practically
in an age of stone. Copper and gold they knew, but the former was
rare, and gold ornaments have not been found in great numbers in the
country. The elaborate monuments, such as are described in the next
chapter, must have been worked almost entirely with stone implements,
though copper chisels, hardened at the edge by hammering, may have
been used to a limited extent; indeed blocks of stone have been found
bearing marks which could hardly have been made except by a metal tool.
Stone, including jadeite, and obsidian must have furnished by far the
larger proportion of the implements used by masons and carvers, and the
latter was imported into Yucatan from the volcanic districts. Examples
of stone-flaking are not very common in the Maya area, but little
excavation has been carried out. It must have been widely practised,
since the glyph representing a knife, and the spear-heads as shown
on the reliefs, both exhibit marks indicating flaking. Objects of
flaked stone, of a very interesting class, are found in some numbers
in British Honduras; these include obsidian arrow-heads of extremely
graceful design, and a large number of what may be ornaments or
ceremonial objects made from a kind of chert and exhibiting great
variety of type. A few of these are shown in Fig. 64, but it should
be mentioned that human and animal forms are also found. Objects of
exactly similar type have been found at Naranjo in Guatemala. Maya
stone-carving is considerably more elaborate than Mexican, and their
art stands on a higher plane. It is true that much of it is in fairly
soft material, but the remains of certain sites, notably Quirigua,
prove that the Maya mason could handle large masses of hard stone with
almost equal facility. Still many of the large Mexican carvings are
in much harder material than any in the Maya area. Smaller works of
stone art consist for the most part of jadeite beads and pendants,
carved in relief (Pl. XI, 1 and 2; p. 140), and stone masks, furnished
with holes for suspension and probably worn as breast-ornaments, (as
shown in Pl. XXII; p. 294). A fine stone mask discovered in a cist near
Benque Viejo, in British Honduras, is illustrated in Fig. 65, and is
interesting as showing the connection which this region evinces with
the Totonac country, a specimen almost identical having been discovered
in Vera Cruz. Unfortunately no early author has left an account of
Maya arts and crafts as Sahagun has of Mexican, but it may safely be
conjectured that the methods of the two peoples were similar.

  [Illustration: FIG. 66.--Women weaving.

  (_Troano-Cortesianus MS._)]

Maya carving is seen at its best when applied to wood, but owing to
the perishable nature of the material few examples have survived.
Nearly all of these are from Tikal, and consist of lintels on which
designs are sculptured in low and beautifully modelled relief (Fig.
48; p. 225). The fact that practically no idols have been discovered
seems to indicate that they were carved in wood and so have failed to
survive, and indeed Landa states that amongst the historical Yucatec
the most venerated idols were wooden. The relation which the reliefs,
especially those of the northern Maya region, as at Palenque, bear to
wood-carvings is evident, and no doubt proficiency in wood-carving
antedated skill in sculpture.

Of weaving and embroidery nothing is known, save that the historical
Yucatec were experts in the art. However, the dresses of the figures
sculptured on the monuments prove that the early Maya had attained
great proficiency in the textile arts. Garments heavy with embroidery,
and with elaborate inwoven designs, are sculptured with great care,
and a fine example is shown on Pl. XXII; p. 294. The loom used must
have been of the same type as that found throughout Mexico and Central
America in historical times (Fig. 66; compare Fig. 27, _b_; p.
148).

The subject of Maya pottery, though extremely interesting, has not
yet been studied sufficiently to yield any very important results,
as far as indicating the direction in which the culture spread.
It is complicated moreover by the fact that there was evidently a
considerable trade in pottery in early times, and the ware of a good
factory spread far and wide over a large area. Besides this the
available material has not yet been fully classified, and much more
excavation must be performed before really representative collections,
illustrative of the various districts, can be brought together. Seler
has attempted to trace to some extent the wanderings of pottery from
certain centres of manufacture; he calls attention to the finding in
Guatemala of ware of Tarascan type; and concludes that the ware of
Huehuetenango and Chiquimula spread over the whole of south-western
Guatemala and south-eastern Chiapas, while that of Jilotepec in the
Guatemalan province of Jalapa was carried to south-eastern Guatemala
and western San Salvador. The Maya had carried the fictile art to a
high degree of development, though they never obtained such a mastery
over their material as the coastal tribes of Peru. Naturally the
quality of the ware varies considerably according to the use for which
the vessel was intended, but the paste in the best specimens is hard,
well mixed and fired, and varies in colour from a bright terra-cotta to
pale cream, though the majority of fragments are of a reddish tinge;
black pottery is rare. Some of the Guatemalan vases are moulded from
a clay containing a large percentage of mica, and these are usually
softer than the better-class ware; while certain vessels from the Peten
district are composed of a very coarse grey clay containing small
pebbles. The latter have not been fired at a high temperature and are
very soft. Another form of coarse, soft and brittle ware is found in
British Honduras, chiefly in the form of small figurines probably made
for funerary purposes (Pl. IX, 7–11; p. 82).

The shapes in which the pots were moulded exhibit great variety, and
most of the types characteristic of Sacrificios are found scattered
over the whole area, though they are more common in Guatemala than in
Yucatan and Honduras. In particular a very close connection appears to
exist between Sacrificios pottery and the ware of the Alta Vera Paz
region. The similarity is not confined to shape, but relates also to
the peculiar slate-coloured earth-glaze (see p. 194), which is found
on many of the vases of this district, and extends westward into the
neighbourhood of Quen Santo in western Guatemala close to the Chiapas
border. Another interesting similarity exists between the spouted vases
of the Huaxtec country and certain pots discovered in British Honduras,
and further south in Honduras. The resemblance which certain forms
of the Uloa valley bear to the regular Huaxtec “teapot” (Fig. 42; p.
196) with its vertical spout is very striking, but the bodies are not
ornamented with painted designs, being either plain or decorated with
faint gadroons.

The shape which is perhaps of widest distribution is the tripod bowl,
the feet of which terminate in grotesque animal heads, like those of
Sacrificios (Pl. XIX; p. 198), or are moulded in cascabel form and
contain a rattle (as Fig. 36, 9; p. 185). The former type appears
rather to be limited to Vera Paz, while the latter has a wider range.
The beaker-form with expanding foot, so common at Sacrificios (e.g. Pl.
XVIII, 10; p. 194), extends through Vera Paz to the Chacula district,
while bowls, invariably with a flat base, and bottle-forms, appear
to be found in greatest numbers in the Uloa valley. The pottery of
the latter district is distinguished by the frequency of loop-handles
attached to the bodies of vases, usually two in number, but sometimes
four, and always disposed symmetrically. Bowls with the peculiar flat
feet characteristic of the Mexican valley (Fig. 36, 3; p. 185), and
the dishes with a single expanding foot (Fig. 36, 8), so common at
Sacrificios, have not yet been found in this area. Characteristic of
the Quiché area are vases of coarse ware in “slipper” form, a type
which is also common in Nicaragua, where it is often used as a funerary
urn.

  [Illustration:

  _PLATE XXIV_

  MAYA

  Design on a pottery vase found at Nebaj, Guatamala.

  (Fleischman Collection)]

Vases painted in the early Maya style are unhappily very rare, though
two magnificent vases have been discovered, one at Chama and the other
at Nebaj. The design on the latter I am enabled to figure (Pl. XXIV;
p. 310) through the kindness of Mr. C. Fleischmann, the possessor. It
is cylindrical in shape, of the best quality red ware, hard, light and
well-fired, and covered with a highly burnished yellow-brown slip on
which the designs are painted in red and yellow with black outlines.
The scene represents a visit paid to a chief by an inferior; the
former is seated on a dais, and wears a head-dress terminating in a
flower from which hangs a fish, a form of ornament also observed on
reliefs at Naranjo, Palenque and Chichen Itza. His visitor is offering
a pouch containing copal, and the rest of the field is filled with
the figures of three attendants, one of which is engaged, apparently,
in pouring some liquid from a vessel over two egg-like objects on a
small table. The treatment of the figures and accompanying glyphs is
particularly free and bold, and the whole scene is an excellent example
of Maya draughtsmanship at its best. Fragments of vases painted in
similar style, though not quite so good, have been found in the same
region, and also in the Uloa valley, though the specimens from the
latter locality exhibit certain peculiarities of drawing which prevent
them from being considered typically Maya (Fig. 67). The use of a
slip-covering to pottery is found throughout the whole area, though it
is by no means constant; the colour is most commonly red or yellow,
though white and brown are also found. Painted decoration is also in
slip, of similar colours, and where figures are represented they are
usually outlined in black (e.g. Pl. XXIV). The funerary pottery of
British Honduras shows a greater variety of hue; in many cases the slip
(white) is so thick as almost to amount to a kind of stucco, and on
this the details are painted in brilliant colours, including a bright
red and a turquoise-blue (Pl. IX, 7–11; p. 82).

  [Illustration: FIG. 67.--Bat-design from a vase;
  Uloa valley. (_After Gordon_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 68.--Pottery vase from Chama,
  Guatemala. (_After Seler_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 69.--Pottery vase from Ococingo,
  Chiapas. (_After Seler_)]

Designs are frequently found engraved in slip, and the most interesting
of such vessels come from the Vera Paz district. Beakers with expanding
foot, exactly similar to the specimens from Sacrificios, are found
here, with incised patterns from which, in some cases, the background
has been cut away. Such vases have been found also in the neighbourhood
of Chacula, but the engraved pots most characteristic of Guatemala
belong to the type of which a fine specimen is shown in Fig. 68. Here
the design is cut in a thick white slip, and represents the sky-god
emerging from a shell, probably symbolizing his connection with the
moon. A vase of interesting type and ornamented in somewhat similar
fashion, is illustrated in Fig. 69. This specimen was found at
Ococingo in Chiapas, and is furnished with a cover. Vases found with
covers are rare, but no doubt the covers of many have been lost; three
vessels however with covering plates of black ware have been discovered
at La Cueva near Coban, and with them were found certain vases of a
type unique in this region, representing a human figure of which the
head could be removed and constituted a lid. Pots somewhat similar in
design are known from the lower Amazon in South America. A certain
proportion of the pottery is mould-made, and this method appears to
have been most extensively employed in the Alta Vera Paz area, where
moulds for the manufacture of whole pots have been found. Some of the
mould-made vases are of good quality and shape, and the design often
includes a row of glyphs. Vases of this type have been discovered also
at Copan and in the Uloa valley. From Vera Paz also come plaques with
excellent designs, including figures holding the “ceremonial bar,”
together with the moulds in which they were made. These are in hard
terra-cotta coloured clay, and are not furnished with a slip. Many
details to serve as applied ornament to vases and censers were also
made in moulds (e.g. the sun-face which forms the cover-design), while
a great proportion of the figurines and whistles throughout the Maya
region were similarly constructed.

  [Illustration: FIG. 70.--Pottery vase from Coban,
  Guatemala.

  (_After Seler_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 71.--Pottery censer from Nebaj,
  Guatemala.

  (_Fleischmann Collection_)]

Relief ornament moulded by hand is common throughout the Maya area, and
in the Vera Paz region vases are frequently found in the shape of birds
and beasts, sometimes with a human face enclosed in the jaws (similar
to Pl. XVIII, 5). The combination of human and animal forms is
characteristic of Yucatan, but interesting specimens of this type have
been found in the Vera Paz region, as well as the plain bird and beast
forms (Fig. 70), though here both types bear a striking similarity to
the Sacrificios vases. An extremely interesting vase, with a human head
moulded in relief, has been found near Coban. This is exactly similar
to certain Zapotec pots, and the head and head-dress are in true
Zapotec style; but the paste is different, and the vase is coated with
the slate-coloured earth-glaze, mentioned above, which has never been
found in the Zapotec area. All indications seem to prove that it was
made locally, and if this is so, it affords a striking instance of the
borrowing of forms and illustrates the danger of basing arguments as to
tribal migration on pottery types alone, though it provides a valuable
hint of cultural contact. It is worthy of remark that the animal forms
seem borrowed from the fauna of the Tierra caliente, a fact which goes
far to indicate that the potters of Alta Vera Paz borrowed from the
Totonac and people of Tabasco and not _vice versa_.

The most elaborate relief decoration, not made in moulds, seems to
have been applied to censers, and the large specimens in cylindrical
form which have been found from the Chacula district to that of Coban,
are particularly bold and vigorous in treatment (Fig. 71). In the case
of vessels of this type much of the ornament appears to have been
applied, but fragments of censers of another pattern, with handles,
and conforming more closely to the type shown in Pl. IX; p. 82, have
been discovered, perhaps more frequently in Vera Paz. These exhibit
considerable artistic and technical skill in their construction; the
handles are hollow, and usually terminate in a grotesque face, the
eyes and mouth of which form apertures connected with the cavity in
the handle. The numerous fragments of figurines of rather coarse
unburnished clay found throughout British Honduras seem in most
cases to have formed part of large vessels, which probably served
as censers (Pl. X, 3; p. 108). Free use was made of applied details
in this district, as can be seen from the illustration on Pl. X, 3;
p. 108. From the Pokomam region come peculiar circular dishes, with
broad flat rims, the vertical walls of which are studded with conical
projections; it is possible that these vessels also, which appear to
be characteristic of the district, were censers. In the Uloa valley
fragments of vases of a peculiar type have been found, distinguished by
lugs in the form of animal heads. Pots of this description are usually
further decorated with painted designs of good quality in yellow,
orange, brown and black (as Fig. 67; p. 311). Pottery figurines,
serving as whistles, with one or more finger-holes, are not uncommon,
especially in the Uloa valley. As said before, the majority appear
to have been made in moulds, but the funerary figurines of British
Honduras (Pl. IX, 7–11; p. 82), also mentioned above, seem to have
been modelled by hand. Large solid hand-modelled heads have also
been found in Vera Paz, and were probably the heads of idols, since
Landa states that the latter were frequently made of clay among the
Maya. A fine specimen, which, to judge from the peculiarly cut teeth,
may be identified with the sun-god, is shown in Fig. 72. Smaller
solid figurines, but mould-made, have been found at Copan, Tikal and
other ruined sites; many of these show traces of paint, including a
turquoise-blue, and the details, though less bold, belong to a higher
type of art and correspond very closely with those of the stelæ.

  [Illustration: FIG. 72.--Pottery head of the
  sun-god; Nebaj, Guatemala.

  (_Fleischmann Collection_)]

An interesting peculiarity of the Vera Paz representations in pottery
of the human face lies in the fact that beards and even moustaches
are not infrequently shown. The former class of adornment can be
paralleled in the ancient stone carvings, but the moustaches on
the latter are rather problematical, and in any case are not nearly
so full as those of the pottery faces of Vera Paz. Another find in
the same district, highly interesting from the point of view of
technique, consists in a number of spherical pottery beads, overlaid
with gold-foil of extreme thinness. The process by which the gold was
applied to the clay constitutes a problem of some difficulty, though
the specimens themselves recall the wooden beads, similarly overlaid,
discovered in the Totonac region (p. 144).

A certain amount of pottery has been discovered in the caves, both in
Yucatan and in the neighbourhood of Copan, which show traces of human
occupation. This pottery is peculiar in the fact that it appears in
no case to bear any definite relation to the other pottery of the
district. The Copan cave-pottery is for the most part in bottle form,
with faint gadroon mouldings or impressed key-patterns; while fragments
from a cave at Loltun, in Yucatan (immediately south of Uxmal), seem to
be in the main of bowls, sometimes with small ring-handles, and usually
with fine incised linear designs. The ware of the latter is black and
thin, and fragments of figurines occur, the technique of which recalls
that of British Honduras.

As stated before, the material is not sufficient to furnish support to
important theories, but the close connection of the Vera Paz pottery
with that of Sacrificios appears obvious, a connection which extends
through to the Chacula region. But too much stress must not be laid
upon this, because many forms and details of ornament connect the Vera
Paz area with the Copan district, notably the engraved, mould-made
and painted pots which bear glyphs. The practice of cutting away the
background extends from the Totonac country, through Vera Paz and
the Chacula district up into Oaxaca, but no trace is found of the
champ-levé work discovered at Sacrificios, Teotihuacan and in the
Tarascan country. The turquoise-blue colour occurring on pots in the
last style is rare in the Maya area, and is limited to the pottery
of British Honduras and certain figurines which seem to bear a close
relation to the early culture to which the ruins belong. The ware of
the Uloa valley, which has been investigated with some care by Gordon,
displays technical qualities which are identical with that of Copan,
but is distinguished by a number of features, principally relating
to ornament, which give it a character of its own. Many features
suggestive of Totonac influence appear in the pottery of British
Honduras, and though the ware is, to speak technically, of inferior
quality, considerable artistic skill is shown in the modelling of
the human face (e.g. Pl. X, 3; p. 108). The attribution of forms,
as given above, to different districts can however only be regarded
as tentative, and will probably have to be modified in the light
of subsequent discoveries. The most pressing need is an accurate
classification of Maya pottery, together with a careful investigation
of the various qualities of paste employed in different districts.
The latter is particularly important, since it would afford far more
valuable evidence regarding centres of pottery manufacture than a
mere study of the forms. Community of form after all only implies
connection, and often merely trade-connection which may be second,
third, or fourth hand; but a careful investigation of the material will
often reveal the actual locality of manufacture, and when this has been
fixed for a number of centres, the main lines of trade and the artistic
influence exerted by one locality upon another can be estimated with
some degree of accuracy.




             CHAPTER XIII--THE MAYA: ARCHITECTURAL REMAINS


The architectural remains exemplifying the early Maya culture are
scattered over a wide region, roughly between 87 and 94 degrees of west
longitude, and between 14 and 22 degrees of north latitude. The western
portion of the area consists of the high plateau, intersected with
river-valleys, and distinguished by much relatively open country. Over
this ground various tribal migrations have passed, but the ruins do not
show a culture of so high a type as those of the country further east.
Between the plateau and Yucatan, buildings of the highest type are
found, in low-lying alluvial country, densely forested, in which stone
is, practically speaking, only procurable where the hills approach
the rivers. In Yucatan, material for architectural construction was
ready to hand in the soft limestone of which the peninsula is formed,
and the action of the underground streams in causing the land-surface
to collapse in places, had broken up the limestone into slabs of all
sizes, almost as if to suit the convenience of the builder. But the
Yucatec buildings belong on the whole to a later date than those of the
central region, and though technically they may equal the latter, yet
signs of artistic decadence make their appearance in over-luxuriant
conventionalization, and indications of foreign influence are seen at
certain sites, notably at Chichen Itza.

In a book intended mainly as an introduction to the study of Mayan
archæology a full description of the many ruined sites is out of the
question, and this chapter will be limited to a consideration of
the main points of Mayan architecture, with illustrations taken from
the chief groups of remains. Those who desire fuller details may be
referred to the magnificent plates of Maudslay, and the extremely
valuable and illuminating descriptions of Palenque, Chichen Itza, Uxmal
and Mitla (besides Monte Alban and Teotihuacan) of Holmes. Spinden’s
monograph on Maya art should also be studied, as well as Seler’s book
on the ruins at and around Chacula.

The sites to which especial reference will be made are the following:
In the Usumacinta valley, Palenque, Piedras Negras and Menché; in the
level country near the British Honduras border, Tikal, Naranjo and
Seibal; on either side of the Guatemala-Honduras frontier, Quirigua
and Copan; and in Yucatan Chichen Itza, Uxmal, Sayil and Tulum. Some
allusion will also be made to remains in British Honduras, notably at
Santa Rita, and to the district of Huehuetenango in western Guatemala.

  [Illustration: FIG. 73.--Examples of Maya terraces
  and pyramids (buildings omitted).

    _a-e._ Most common forms.
    _f._ “El Castillo” at Chichen Itza.
    _g._ “Governor’s Palace,” Uxmal.
    _h._ “Temple of the Magician,” Uxmal.
    _i._ Ball-court temple, Chichen Itza.

  (_After Holmes_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 74.--Transverse section of a
  typical Yucatec building.

    _a._ Lower wall with doorway.
    _b._ Doorway.
    _c._ Wooden lintels.
    _d._ Communication doorway.
    _e._ Inner face of arch.
    _f._ Capstones of arch.
    _g._ Lower string-course.
    _h._ Decorated entablature.
    _i._ Upper string-course.
    _j._ Flying façade with ornament (sometimes added).
    _k._ Cornice of last.
    _l._ Roof-crest with ornament (sometimes substituted for
                _j_).

  (_After Holmes_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 75.--Examples of Maya buildings.

    _a._ Single-chambered building.
    _b._ Multiple-chambered building.
    _c._ The round tower at Chichen Itza (restored).
    _d._ Building at Chichen Itza with sloping entablature of
                Palenque type.
    _e._ Palenque type of temple.
    _f._ The square tower at Palenque (restored).

  (_After Holmes_)]

One of the principal features of Mayan architecture, as also Mexican,
is the fact that all buildings of importance are constructed on
raised foundations, varying in form from low platform mounds, often
of irregular shape, to lofty pyramidal structures (Fig. 73). The two
are not infrequently found combined, and a platform-mound sometimes
supports a group of pyramids on which temples were erected. The
sides of the platform-mound are sometimes given a steep slope, or
are sometimes built vertical or nearly so, the latter form being
characteristic rather of Yucatan. The pyramids are usually of the
stepped variety, and the risers of the steps are frequently sloped;
they are provided with a main stairway on one face, and sometimes
with supplemental stairways on the other faces, as in the case of the
so-called “Castillo” at Chichen Itza, which can be seen to the left
of Pl. XXVIII; p. 348. In this building, and also at Copan, the
stairway is furnished with ornamental balustrades, those at Chichen
being carved in the form of two monstrous snakes of which the heads
are extended on the ground at the foot of the pyramid. Practically
all pyramid-mounds served as the support for buildings, though a
certain number, without stairways, have been found which are simply
burial-mounds. An exception occurs at Tikal (according to Tozzer), and
perhaps in other places, where high pyramids with stairways appear to
have had no crowning structures, and were possibly used as sites for
offerings made in the open air. The material of which such structures
are built is earth and rubble, and they have usually been faced with
stone dressed with more or less accuracy, any imperfections being
concealed with stucco. In some cases, notably at Copan, excavation
has revealed the presence of a cement layer at some depth beneath
the surface. This is probably an indication that the pyramid at some
period has been enlarged, and it may be said that similar evidence of
the practice of adding to existing structures is found elsewhere in
the Maya area. The buildings which crown the foundation-mounds vary
in type from simple, single-chambered edifices to elaborate complexes
such as are found at Palenque and Menché, but as a matter of fact
the construction is essentially the same throughout. The form of the
typical Maya building was to a great extent conditioned by the fact
that the primitive architect was ignorant of the principle of the true
arch. It is possible that some buildings may have been furnished with
flat roofs by means of wooden beams, but if so the beams have decayed
and the buildings have fallen in; such structures as have survived
were built as follows (Figs. 74 and 77; pp. 323 and 329): The walls,
built very thick, were carried vertically up to the desired height,
and then the mason commenced to build inwards at a very wide angle,
allowing successive courses to overlap, until those on opposite walls
approached near enough for the space to be bridged by single slabs.
Meanwhile the outer faces of the walls were carried up vertically or at
a slope, and the exterior of the roof was finished off flat or with a
very slight gable respectively. The distance between the spring of the
vault and the apex was considerable, and this gave to the exterior face
of Maya buildings a very deep entablature (Fig. 74, _h_) which
afforded a magnificent space for ornament. The entablature is separated
from the wall proper, which is usually unornamented, by a projecting
cornice or “string-course” (Fig. 74, _g_), the design of which
varies according to locality, and in some of the Chichen buildings the
lower portion of the wall is battered. The form of vault limited the
width of the chamber to ten feet or so, but placed no restrictions
upon its length, and at Palenque we find long corridor-like chambers,
with frequent doorways, built upon this principle. In Yucatan the
entablature is nearly always perpendicular (Fig. 74, _h_), at
Tikal and Menché it slopes slightly backward, and at Palenque the slope
is considerable (Fig. 77; p. 329); but these are inessential details,
and it may be said that the typical Maya building is a solid, box-like
structure containing a narrow chamber vaulted as described above.
Even the more complex edifices are nothing more than an agglomeration
of such chambers, and the type holds good for the whole of the Maya
region. The nature of the Maya vault embodies the principle, in the
words of Spinden, of “the downward thrust of a load on over-stepping
stones,” and this thrust was often increased by the addition of a
superstructure, usually known as a “roof-comb” (Figs. 74, _l_,
and 75, _e_). This addition reached its greatest dimensions at
Tikal, where it usually resembles a very high-pitched stepped mound,
sometimes solid, sometimes enclosing one or more very narrow blind
chambers (Fig. 76, 9, _a_, and 11). The roof-comb was present
also at Menché and probably at Naranjo and Piedras Negras (though not
at Copan or Quirigua), but attains its greatest artistic development
at Palenque (see Pl. XXVII; p. 342), where it is a light and airy
structure, pierced with open-work, and elaborately ornamented with
stucco reliefs. In Yucatan the roof-comb, where found, differs from
those of the central Maya area in consisting, not of two inclined
walls, but of a single vertical wall (Fig. 74, _l_), and it is
often replaced by an elaborate false front, (Fig. 74, _j_), rising
above the vertical entablature, the ornament of which it carries up
to a greater height. But though the roof-comb may by its weight have
assisted in giving stability to the Maya building, it was by no means
essential, the thick walls and solid roof were constructed of stones
freely mixed with mortar, and the result was a structure which was
practically a monolith; in fact, the Maya built caves, the exterior
surfaces of which they faced with a veneer of dressed slabs, often,
especially in Yucatan, carved and arranged to form elaborate mosaic
decoration. Their method of building was extremely wasteful of space,
and Holmes says of the so-called “Governor’s Palace” at Uxmal, figured
on Pl. XXX; p. 358, “We find by a rough computation that the structure
occupies some 325,000 cubic feet of space, upwards of 200,000 of which
is solid masonry, while only about 110,000 feet is chamber-space.
If the substructure be taken into account, the mass of masonry is
to the chamber-space approximately as 40 to 1.” In the case of the
buildings at Tikal, the proportion of chamber-space is considerably
less (see Fig. 76, 11). In some cases at any rate the connection of the
superimposed building with the foundation-mound on which it rested is
emphasized by the fact that the walls of the former continue downwards
into the heart of the latter (according to Holmes), possibly even to
the ground-level. The doorways by which these buildings were entered
are for the most part simple. In the more massive structures, such
as Tikal and Copan, a single doorway seems to have been the rule;
but at the sites which display greater architectural advancement,
such as Palenque, the front is often broken by a series of doorways
so close together that the wall becomes little more than a series of
square pillars (Fig. 75, _d_). Round columns are found only in
Yucatan, especially at Chichen Itza, associated with those buildings
which are attributed to a later date (Pl. XXIX). It is interesting to
note that, while in the Old World the column is based for the most
part on vegetal forms, in this country the animal world has been
laid under contribution. The Chichen columns are carved to represent
feathered serpents, with their heads upon the ground and their tails
elevated in the air, exactly similar to the columns which have been
found at Tulan in Mexico. Stone was employed for lintels, especially
at Menché, where they are elaborately carved, but wood was used almost
more frequently. The carved lintels of Tikal (see Fig. 48; p. 225),
of the durable zapote wood, are among the finest examples of Maya
art, and have survived owing to the solidity of the buildings and
their single doorways. At Palenque and in Yucatan the wooden lintels,
being less well protected, have vanished, and their decay has often
contributed to the downfall of the structure; at the same time the
fact that many of the buildings have not suffered to any extent from
the removal of the lintels emphasizes the monolithic character of the
Maya building. Windows are practically non-existent, though openings
in the walls between chambers are common, especially at Palenque (Fig.
77; p. 329). As stated above, the typical Maya building is a simple
rectangular chamber, as shown in the plan, Fig. 76, 1. But it was
capable of considerable elaboration, and the succeeding plans show
some of the variations produced by the addition of subsidiary chambers
and the breaking of the wall by means of doorways. The highest degree
of complexity is seen at Palenque, where the main building contains a
specially-built cell, furnished with a separate roof, to enshrine the
mural tablet which probably served as an object of worship (Fig. 77).

  [Illustration: FIG. 76.--Ground-plans and elevations
  of Maya temples.

    1. Single-chambered building (Fig. 75, _a_).
    2.        „          „       wall broken by doorways.
    3. Two-chambered building.
    4.        „          „       with circular columns.
    5. Temple “El Castillo” at Chichen Itza.
    6. Temple of Palenque type (Fig. 77).
    7. Temple at Menché.
    8. Temple at Piedras Negras.
    9. Temple at Tikal.
    9_a_. Elevation of 9.
    10. Temple at Copan.
    11. Temple at Tikal with single chamber and hollow roof-crest.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 77.--Section through the Temple
  of the Cross, Palenque (lintels restored): see Fig. 76, 6.

    _a._ Stairway.
    _b._ Pillar (restored).
    _c._ Vestibule.
    _d._ Doorway to inner side chamber.
    _e._ Large doorway to inner main chamber.
    _f._ Doorway to shrine.
    _g._ Shrine.
    _h._ Original position of mural tablet.
    _i._ Masonry arch-brace.
    _j._ Capstones of doorway arch.
    _k._ Partition-wall.
    _l._ Steps for ascending roof-crest through middle floor.
    _m._ Middle floor and roof of roof-crest.

  (_After Holmes_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 78.--Plans and section of
  building at Santa Rosa Xlabpak.

    A. Plan, ground floor.      C. Plan, second floor.
    B.   „    first floor.      D. Section.

  (_After Spinden_)]

The methods of the Maya builder, and in particular his ignorance of the
true arch, rendered the construction of an edifice of more than one
storey (apart from the roof-comb) a matter of considerable difficulty.
Nevertheless buildings of two, and even three tiers of chambers
are known, though the plan on which they were erected was extremely
wasteful of material and space. Usually the higher or highest tier was
supported on a solid construction, around which the chambers of the
lower tier or tiers were grouped (Fig. 78). The whole edifice thus
resembled in the main a huge stepped mound, with rooms built in each
of the steps. Sometimes the outer chambers of a superior tier would
overlap those of an inferior to some extent, but in such cases the
floor of an upper chamber was almost always supported on the dividing
wall of two of the lower. The cave-like structure of Maya buildings is
particularly evident in such architectural monstrosities. However, many
of the sites do not include buildings of more than one floor (apart
from the roof-comb). In some cases, as at Tikal, the upper tiers must
have been reached by ladders, as no stairway leads to them, and it is
interesting to note in this connection that more than one stela at
Piedras Negras represents a god seated in a niche to which a ladder
gives access from below (Pl. XX; p. 224). The finest example of a
three-tiered building is found at Santa Rosa Xlabpak (Fig. 78), but in
this case a broad stairway leads from the ground to the highest tier.
Two remarkable buildings of more than one storey call for mention, if
only as exceptions to the general rule. These are the square tower at
Palenque, and the circular edifice known as the “Caracol” at Chichen
Itza. The first (Fig. 75, _f_) had originally at least three
floors, as well as two intermediate blind storeys, the chambers of
which are grouped around a square core of masonry in which is built
a staircase. The second (Fig. 75, _e_), which has two storeys,
is constructed round a circular core, in which is a very small spiral
stairway. The essentials of construction are the same, the chief
differences lying in the facts, firstly, that whereas the chambers of
the Caracol are all vaulted, those of the Palenque tower are in some
cases furnished with flat ceilings of beams, and secondly, that while
the upper storey of the Caracol is considerably less in diameter than
the lower, the square tower retains the same diameter throughout.
Architecturally the latter is considerably superior to the former, but
the shape of the Caracol is interesting since it is the only circular
construction now existing in the Maya country, though Landa states that
a circular temple to Kukulkan was built at Mayapan, and further remarks
that this shape of building was particularly related to this god. It
will be remembered that circular temples, according to tradition, were
erected to Quetzalcoatl, his counterpart, in Mexico.

The Maya architects did not attempt to handle large masses of stone in
the construction of their buildings; no blocks comparable in size with
the great lintels of Mitla enter into the composition of Maya temples
and in the art of masonry the Maya were far behind the megalithic
builders of the Peruvian and Bolivian highlands. The only attempt at
stone building, where regularly squared blocks are laid in rows with
due attention to the breaking of courses and the bonding of corners,
is found at Copan, and that too in only a very small proportion of the
ruins of that site. Elsewhere no regard is paid to these two important
architectural points, and this fact has contributed in some degree
to the downfall of many of the buildings. However, the fault is the
less serious owing to the extreme solidity of the stone-and-mortar
hearting. As stated above, Maya buildings were faced with a veneer of
blocks dressed on the exterior surface; these were usually cut away to
some extent behind, so that the mortar in which they were set extended
in tongues nearly to the outer face of the wall, just as at Mitla;
but in many cases the tenon-like backs of the surface-blocks were not
sufficiently prominent, and in consequence they have fallen away from
the core of stone and mortar, leaving the latter exposed. This method
of facing enabled the builders to ornament their temples with the most
elaborate mosaic designs, which are seen in their greatest complexity
in Yucatan (Pls. XXIX, 2, and XXX; pp. 350 and 358). The designs here
fall roughly into two classes, geometrical patterns, which often appear
to be based upon textile art, and grotesque representations of the
human face (e.g. Fig. 86, _g_; p. 356). The latter is particularly
characteristic of the region, and represents probably the face of the
god B, the counterpart of the Mexican Tlaloc, whose nose is frequently
prolonged into a regular trunk (see Pl. XXIX, 2). Some of the
geometrical patterns are produced by the regular repetition of a small
element, and these naturally were easier of construction since they
are composed of similarly carved blocks; but many of the designs are
formed of blocks each of which has been carved to fit the particular
place which it occupies in the whole scheme of ornament, and this fact
not only bears witness to a vast amount of patient labour, but implies
also that the architect was working in accordance with a definite
plan prepared beforehand. In Chichen Itza grotesque masks are found in
some of the buildings, composed of details which do not fit into the
scheme, a fact which proves that the Maya mason was not above utilizing
material gleaned from the ruins of former buildings, besides affording
evidence that such structures are of later date. It has already been
mentioned that circular columns are peculiar to Yucatan, and it may be
added that a variety of ornament derived from them was also applied to
the outer surface of buildings, in the form of series of pilasters,
such as are found at Sayil, and Labna and elsewhere (Pl. XXV, 1; p.
332).

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXV_

   _Photo. Col. F. H. Ward_

  1

   _Photo. Dr. A. P. Maudslay_

  2

  MAYA

  1. BUILDING AT SAYIL, YUCATAN

  2. TEMPLE AT TIKAL, GUATEMALA]

Mortar, obtained by burning the local limestone, besides being used in
great quantities for the hearting of buildings, was also employed for
flooring, and, as stucco, for making up defects in wall-surfaces and
designs. Besides this it was extensively used for moulded decoration
at certain sites, notably Palenque. Here the limestone is of a very
hard variety, and difficult to work with such tools as the Maya
possessed; as a result, the art of modelling in relief attained a great
development, and some of the finest works of Central American art are
those produced by the stucco-workers of Palenque. Where the relief is
low, the stucco has been employed alone, but where bold effects were
desired, as on the roof-combs, a regular skeleton of the design has
first been prepared, of limestone blocks, over which the stucco has
been applied and moulded to the requisite form.

Colour formed an important aid to Maya ornament, and was frequently
applied to stone carvings. It seems to us rather barbarous to cover
fine stone reliefs with a coat of coloured stucco, but the Maya artist
had no scruples on this score, and reliefs have been found at Palenque
to which several layers of the above have been applied at different
times. Many of the stelæ, especially at Piedras Negras, still show
evident traces of colour, and it must be remembered that when the
details were picked out in different tints the designs appeared far
less complicated than in monochrome. But apart from the colouring of
reliefs, fresco designs in a variety of hues were commonly applied
to the interior walls of buildings, and their graceful and flowing
lines prove that the Maya was no mean artist with the brush. This form
of ornament has been observed at Menché, where a design of scrolls,
leaves, flowers and figures of men and animals is painted on the walls
of one of the chambers, in two reds, two blues, yellow and dark brown.
At Chichen Itza the art of fresco was highly developed; not only
were the columns, doorposts and interior reliefs painted in colours,
but many chambers were elaborately ornamented with coloured designs.
According to Miss Breton, who has made a careful study of these
frescoes, two different hands may be traced in the method of execution.
One artist employed outlines but sparingly, and carried out the greater
part of his work in dry colour, sometimes superimposing one tint on
another to obtain the desired effect. The other drew all his figures
in outline and added the principal colour masses while the plaster was
still damp, putting in the details subsequently in dry colour. The hues
include two reds, two blues, four greens, yellow, white, black and
purple. The practice of ornamenting wall-surfaces with painted designs
extends into British Honduras, where a building with very important
frescoes has been discovered under peculiar circumstances. This is at
Santa Rita, and the building in question was found buried in a large
mound, which had been heaped over it, apparently with intention. The
frescoes are painted on the walls below the cornice, and had been
shielded from the earth by protecting walls built about an inch from
them to meet the cornice. The colours include red, pink, blue, yellow,
grey and black, and the design represents a number of human or divine
figures accompanied by date-glyphs in the Maya style. Among the figures
the Maya gods B and K of the manuscripts may be easily recognized,
while one with bird and serpent attributes may well be Kukulkan (Fig.
79). At the same time one figure is shown with black paint around the
eye, exactly as worn by the Aztec Mixcoatl and other stellar gods,
while other details peculiar to Mexican art appear, such as a frieze
of star-eyes, very similar to that of Mitla (compare Fig. 80), and
sun-discs in Mexican style. Many of the figures are represented with
bound hands, and in one place a sacrificial scene is depicted. It is
possible that the fresco commemorates some victory, but the occasion,
as well as the reason of the burial of the building, remains a mystery.

  [Illustration: FIG. 79.--Detail of fresco at Santa
  Rita, British Honduras.

  (_After Gann_)]

Apart from the buildings reserved for ceremonial or residential
purposes, tlaxtli-courts are found in the Huehuetenango district, at
Rabinal, and again in northern Yucatan, though not in the central
area. These courts have the floor and walls carefully plastered, and
the stone rings which project, one from each wall, are usually well
carved. The court at Chichen is the largest known, and is associated
with a special temple with serpent columns in the style of Tulan (Pls.
XXVIII and XXIX, 1; pp. 348 and 350). The western courts resemble very
closely those of the Zapotec area. The question of the introduction of
the game into the Maya area has already been discussed on p. 302.

  [Illustration: FIG. 80.--Details from frescoes.

    A. Santa Rita, British Honduras.
    B. Mitla, Oaxaca.]


Living as they did in a climate with an abundant rainfall, the Maya
were not under the necessity of constructing elaborate irrigation
works as were the ancient inhabitants of Peru. One watercourse alone
is known, and that appears to be rather in the nature of a drain to
carry off superfluous water than an aqueduct. This is at Palenque, and
consists of a stone-lined subterranean channel, roofed with the typical
Maya vault.

As regards the arrangement of buildings it is impossible to discuss
in detail the ground-plans of the various sites, but attention may
be called to the prevailing tendency to group the most important
structures round square or rectangular courts. Beyond this, little
community of plan is observed, and indeed in the central area the
builders were often obliged to suit their arrangement to the exigencies
of the site. Thus Palenque and Copan, being built in river-valleys,
exhibit less regularity of arrangement than such sites as Tikal, where
the country is more or less of a plain. There is evidence too that
many of the cities grew by accretion beyond the limits intended by the
first builders, and this fact will explain much of the irregularity
observable in plan. But throughout, the assemblage of buildings round
a court is a prominent feature, and the court would seem to have been
the unit of growth (see Pl. XXVI, 2; p. 338). It is a noticeable
fact that none of the sites in the east and centre of the Maya area
exhibit any defensive qualities. The courts are open at the corners,
and the sites selected for building are evidently not chosen with
any strategic insight. In the west, however, the case is somewhat
different, and we find settlements, such as Iximché and Utatlan, built
as it were on peninsulas almost surrounded by inaccessible barrancas
and connected with the “mainland” only by a narrow neck which could be
easily defended by a mere handful of men. This fact goes far towards
indicating that the ruins in the centre were centres of religious and
ceremonial life rather than cities in the modern sense of the word.

The question as to how far Maya buildings were definitely oriented is
rather complex. On the whole far fewer indications of the practice
occur in the Maya region than in the Mexican. To speak generally the
sites at Seibal and in southern Yucatan, as far as surveyed, are
more carefully oriented than in northern Yucatan and elsewhere. The
buildings at Copan are not oriented, but here and at such sites as
Palenque, the surrounding hills and forests obscure the true horizon,
and the arrangement of courts may yet be found to square with the
apparent point of rising of certain heavenly bodies. An accurate survey
of Tikal would throw a good deal of light upon the problem, since the
situation of the ruins in comparatively level country, combined with
the great height of the pyramids, would have enabled the inhabitants to
obtain a far truer horizon than at most sites.

Though the Maya did not for the most part use large masses of stone
for building, yet they were able to handle monoliths of considerable
size, as may be seen from the number of carved stelæ which constitute
so important a feature of many of the ruined sites. These stelæ consist
of monolithic pillars, approximately rectangular and decorated with
relief carving, usually on all sides. The largest of these are found
at Quirigua, but the art of the neighbouring site of Copan (Pl. XXI;
p. 236) is the finer, since many of the stelæ here are carved in such
bold relief as to approximate to sculpture in the round. At these two
sites most of the stelæ present on their principal faces a human or
divine figure, usually represented _en face_, and holding the
sky-bar (occasionally replaced at Quirigua by the ceremonial axe).
At Tikal, Naranjo (Pl. XXIII; p. 302), and Menché (Pl. XXII; p. 294)
the relief is less bold, and the figures are usually therefore shown
in profile, at any rate as far as the face is concerned. At Seibal
and Piedras Negras profile figures predominate, but a few occur shown
_en face_ (Pl. XX; p. 224), among them the figures seated in
niches already mentioned as characteristic of the latter locality.
At Palenque only one stela has been found, but on the other hand
comparatively little stone-carving occurs here, though the deficiency
is amply supplied by the quality of the magnificent mural tablets in
relief which constitute the chief feature of the site. The sky-bar
does not appear on the stelæ of Piedras Negras, though the ceremonial
axe is occasionally seen. Both emblems occur at Naranjo, Tikal, Seibal
and Menché. A few stelæ have been found in Yucatan, e.g. at Sayil; but
they are confined to the northern portion of the district and even
here are rare and poorly carved. The exact purpose of the stelæ is
problematical. In the large majority of cases they stand in definite
relation to certain buildings, in fact all at Naranjo, Seibal, Menché
and Piedras Negras are connected with temples. At Copan and Quirigua
some appear to be independent. They are usually found situated in the
courts, though at Piedras Negras a series exists arranged along the
lower terrace of a foundation-mound. Many are furnished with altars in
front of them (Fig. 81), and they appear to have been the objects of
some cult. A most important point in connection with them lies in the
fact that so many of them bear dates in the long count as described in
chapter X, and this fact, combined with the statements of early authors
that the historical Maya were wont to mark the passage of a katun by
setting up a “stone,” lends colour to the opinion that the early Maya
followed a similar practice. Many of the dates mark quarter katuns,
but many again do not, and though we may conclude that they were in
some way commemorative monuments, it is impossible at present to define
their use more exactly. As stated before, many of the stelæ were
painted in colours, and plain stelæ occur at Tikal and elsewhere, which
probably once bore some painted design. The evident relation which Maya
sculpture bears to wood-carving renders it probable that many wooden
stelæ may once have existed, especially in the earliest times. It is
worth noting that at Copan the stone foundations which support the
stelæ enclose small cruciform vaults, reproducing in miniature the
souterrains found in connection with some of the buildings at Mitla.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXVI_

   _Photo. Col. F. H. Ward_

  1

   _After Maudslay_

  2

  MAYA

  1. SCULPTURED MONOLITH P., QUIRIGUA, GUATEMALA

  2. PLAN OF RUINS AT COPAN, HONDURAS]

  [Illustration:

  FIG. 81.--Stone altar (Q) at Copan.

 (_After Maudslay_)]

At present the attention of most archæologists has been confined to
the ruins themselves, and little search has been made for the sources
whence the building-material was obtained. Quarries however have been
located in the neighbourhoods of Naranjo, Copan and Quirigua, and the
presence at the last site of canal-like excavations suggests that the
blocks were conveyed thither by water. A thorough investigation of such
quarries as can be discovered would be most valuable in casting much
light upon the process of working stone among the early Maya.

In the east of the central area the most important site is that of
Tikal; the ruins are extensive, and suggest that the place was long
an important centre. The dates attached to the monuments are of great
interest (for the comparative dating of the monuments, see Appendix
III), since they range from an early period, and the extreme solidity
of the buildings as compared with those of other sites seems to hint
that they were the work of more primitive architects than those of
Palenque for instance. The pyramids are of interest, since they present
a far steeper pitch than those of any other locality (Pl. XXV, 2; p.
332). Certain of the stelæ and inscriptions are of a rather rude and
archaic character, but the wood-carvings (Fig. 48; p. 225) are of
particular merit, and are very similar in style to the stone lintels
in low relief of Menché. The fact that the wooden lintels have been
preserved here while they have for the most part decayed at other
sites, is no argument against the antiquity of Tikal, for they are
situated well within the buildings, which are, as remarked above, of
very solid construction, and furnished with small single doors, besides
being raised far above the ground on lofty foundation-mounds. On the
whole I think that the architectural and artistic evidence supports
the early dates which appear on the stelæ, and I should place Tikal
as perhaps the earliest Maya site of which we have definite knowledge,
though it is evident that it was inhabited well on into later times
when the Maya had become far more expert in stone-carving than when the
first buildings were erected there. The neighbouring site of Naranjo
bears certain similarities in plan to that of Tikal, and the reliefs
are in very similar style. The dating of the monuments falls into
two well-defined periods, the western court being earlier than the
eastern; both however are considerably later than the earlier buildings
of Tikal, of which Naranjo was probably an offshoot, outlasting the
mother city by more than half a century. Seibal, where the ruins are
far less extensive, is evidently a related site, though the reliefs are
comparatively clumsy in style, and probably represent a decadent and
“provincial” form of art. It is interesting to note that the earliest
date at this site falls about the same time as the last of Tikal, the
latest recording the same katun as the latest at Naranjo.

Menché, like Copan, is built upon the bank of a river, and the physical
character of the site prevented anything like symmetrical arrangement.
The courts do not correspond one with another in position, and careful
investigation would be necessary before it could be stated that any
of the pyramids were so placed as to provide for the observation of
the rising of a planet over the surrounding hills. The dates would
make Menché later than Tikal as far as its foundation is concerned,
and the less massive nature of its architecture and the high quality
of its relief-carving would imply the same. But it is noticeable that
the most numerous reliefs consist of sculptured lintels, and though
these are of stone, and not of wood as at Tikal, the technique is that
of wood-carving, and the style is very similar to that of Tikal. The
artistic quality of the Menché sculptures is relatively very high, and
the lintels, one of which is figured on Pl. XXII, 2; p. 294, are some
of the finest examples of low-relief carving found in the Maya area,
ranking with the bolder sculptures of Copan, and not far behind the
stucco work and still lower reliefs of Palenque. Further features of
this site will be mentioned in connection with Palenque.

Copan (Pl. XXVI, 2; p. 338) and Quirigua evidently bear a close
relation one to the other, and are differentiated from all other
sites by the size and workmanship of the stelæ. Unfortunately but few
traces of buildings remain, and it is impossible to determine their
exact type. All that can be said is that the walls were thick, and
that both in this respect and in the ground-plan (see Fig. 76; p.
327) the buildings probably represent a stage of development midway
between Tikal and other sites. With this placing the dates on the
Copan monuments agree, but Quirigua was a later site, almost certainly
founded from Copan, though it flourished alongside of it until both
records cease at the end of the ninth cycle. The monuments of Quirigua
show a certain technical superiority over those of Copan, the stelæ are
larger, and often ornamented with far greater wealth of detail. The
broader treatment of the Copan carvings (Pl. XXI and Fig. 81; pp. 236
and 339), however, gives a nobler effect to the stelæ of that site,
though Quirigua cannot in any sense be regarded as decadent, as witness
the magnificent monster with a human figure in its jaws shown on Pl.
XXVI, 1; p. 338.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXVII_

    _Photo. J. Cooper Clark_      1      2      3

  MAYA

  RUINS AT PALENQUE, CHIAPAS

    1. THE “TEMPLE OF THE SUN”
    2. THE “PALACE”
    3. THE “TEMPLE OF THE CROSS”]

Piedras Negras is a site of great interest. On the one hand the stelæ
manifest a very great range of quality, on the other the dates commence
early, though not so early as Tikal, and end in the same katun as those
of that city. The rudest stelæ bear a rather interesting resemblance to
the Huaxtec sculptures of the Panuco valley (Pl. X, 1; p. 108), while
the best are of a type peculiar to this locality. The latter represent
a figure _en face_, seated in a niche to which a ladder gives
access, and before which a priest is sometimes represented standing
(Pl. XX; p. 224). It may be noted in passing that the board, or, more
likely, cloth with the footsteps marked on it, laid upon the ladder,
is paralleled in the Dresden MS. by the streamer with similar markings
attached to the tree which represents the god (see Fig. 58; p. 264,
lower register). The exact relations of Piedras Negras are difficult to
determine. On the one hand certain points in connection with costume,
notably the voluminous turban-like head-dresses seen on many of the
figures, recall the art of Copan (e.g. Fig. 81); on the other hand many
of the flatter reliefs bear a distinct resemblance to those of Naranjo,
without attaining the perfection of those at Menché. An interesting
fragment represents a figure seated in profile with a colossal jaguar
towering behind him; unfortunately only the feet and legs of the latter
remain, but sufficient to show that the whole scene must have been
almost a replica of one of the wooden lintels of Tikal. Jaguar figures,
or men with jaguar masks and claws, or claws alone, also occur on stelæ
at Seibal and Quirigua.

  [Illustration:

    FIG. 82.--Stone relief; Temple of the Sun, Palenque.

  (_After Maudslay_)]

Palenque stands alone. Architecturally it is by far the most advanced
of the cities of the central area, while the artistic qualities of
the stucco reliefs, and the low-relief stone carvings (Figs. 49 and
52), the technique of which appears to be based on stucco-work, place
them in a category by themselves. It was, in fact, only at Copan and
Quirigua that the Maya showed anything like mastery over stone. The
deficiency lay no doubt not so much in the artistic faculties of the
mason, as in the lack of suitable tools, but it is a fact that only
at the southern sites he displayed definite signs of modifying the
technique borrowed from wood-carving to suit a less tractable material.
Even the fine reliefs of Menché are wood-carvings translated into
stone, and the same applies to the reliefs at other sites, except
perhaps to the figures in niches at Piedras Negras, which in other
respects noted above display a certain similarity to the Copan
sculptures. When the Maya artist began to develop the art of modelling
in stucco he showed that the quality of his work depended to a great
extent upon the plasticity of his material, while he had gained much in
technique from his experience in stone. A peculiar feature of Palenque
is the comparative restraint exhibited by the artist. That he still
loved complexity of detail is shown by such reliefs as Fig. 61 (p.
297), but he no longer feared the vacant space, and appreciated its
value as a background. The dates on the monuments do not assist us in
any way to determine the epoch which saw the rise of Palenque. The
initial series in the temples give dates relating to the first cycle
or even before, that is to say more than 3000 years B.C., and
as such they must be regarded as purely legendary. It is impossible
to believe that the site was of early foundation compared with the
others. It would be against all experience to suggest that the people
who built Palenque could at a subsequent period have adopted the clumsy
and unnecessarily laborious architecture of Tikal. On the other hand,
the site of Palenque bears a certain similarity to that of Menché,
including the presence at both of buildings with underground passages
and chambers, though the “palace” at Palenque is a far more elaborate
construction than the analogous building at Menché, being in fact a
complex of associated buildings. All the evidence seems to point to the
conclusion that Palenque is the latest of the central Maya sites, and
that it is most closely associated with Menché. In further proof of the
latter supposition I might mention the so-called “crosses,” surmounted
by birds, held by the figures in more than one of the Menché reliefs,
which have their counterparts in the “crosses” of Palenque alone. The
significance of these I have already discussed on p. 257.

I think, then, that the various dates found on the monuments may be
taken as a fair indication of the relative periods at which the various
cities flourished, except of course those at Palenque. Arguments based
upon the style of decoration alone are apt to be misleading, especially
as far as the lesser sites are concerned, since it is only natural that
at these the workmanship should be of an inferior and “provincial”
character. Allowance too must be made for the varying capacity of
local artists, and above all for the relative tractability of the
local materials. The evidence of architecture is more valuable, and,
to speak generally, supports the dates as given by the glyphs, though
the possibility of greater conservatism at some sites, as compared with
others, must not be overlooked. On the whole the best results must
necessarily accrue from a careful consideration of all three, with due
allowance for a natural tendency to quote dates relating to past and
often mythical history.

With respect to certain similarities presented by the attributes of
the figures depicted at certain sites, allusion has been made above to
the hand appearing as part of the head-dress at Copan, Piedras Negras
and Palenque (p. 227), to the jaguar-man at Tikal, Seibal, Piedras
Negras and Quirigua (p. 343), and to the fish and flower, also shown
as a head-dress, at Naranjo, Palenque, Chichen Itza and on the Nebaj
vase (p. 310). Attention will be called later to a peculiar interlaced
ornament, also borne on the head, by figures at Copan, Piedras
Negras, Menché and Naranjo, and found again at Xochicalco, Teayo
and in the Mexican valley (p. 355). One more may be mentioned, the
head-dress representing a heron with a fish or frog in its beak, seen
at Palenque (Fig. 61; p. 297) and twice at Seibal, an ornament which
recalls the Quiché legend of how they sent eastward to a country, most
probably to be identified with the Usumacinta valley, to obtain royal
_insignia_, and received amongst other objects the plumes of the
heron.

  [Illustration: FIG. 83.--The “Monjas” at Chichen
  Itza, showing how the original structure has been enlarged.

  (_After Holmes_)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 84.--Caryatid figure, Chichen
  Itza.]

Of the Yucatec sites the most important is that of Chichen Itza. The
remains here are considerable, though they conform to no definite
plan save that the same arrangement of building round rectangular
courts prevails. The buildings themselves are typically Maya, though
structurally they exhibit a certain advance upon those of the central
area, and Maya glyphs are found throughout, with certain important
exceptions. Of the peculiarities which distinguish the architecture
of Yucatan from that of the last region, many have already been
mentioned, including the mosaic ornament with which the façades of
buildings are decorated. But another important feature remains to be
recorded. Throughout the whole of Yucatan only two dates in the long
count have been discovered, and one of these is at Chichen Itza. The
site is interesting as providing evidence of more than one stage of
construction. One of the finest buildings, the so-called Monjas, shows
plainly that a considerable addition was made to the foundation at a
time later than the original building (Fig. 83). At the same period an
additional storey was added, and one of the chambers in the earlier
structure was filled solid with masonry to support the weight. Certain
annexes were also built (Pl. XXIX, 2; p. 350), in the decoration of
which ornamental fragments from the façades of previous “palaces”
were included, but the inscriptions are in regular Maya characters,
though no date in the long count is included. Other buildings in the
immediate neighbourhood are in similar style and belong presumably
to the same epoch. But further north is a large group of structures
of an entirely different character of ornamentation. These include
the famous ball-court and attached temples (Pl. XXVIII; p. 348), the
Castillo (also seen in Pl. XXVIII), a large structure of which only the
numerous square sculptured columns remain, and the so-called “Temple of
the Tables.” On these buildings neither Maya glyphs nor mosaic masks
are found, while the Castillo and upper ball-court temple are furnished
with serpent-columns similar to those of Tulan. In the lower temple
attached to the ball-court is an elaborate relief showing figures,
exhibiting no signs of cranial deformation, armed with spears and
spear-throwers, assisting, so it would seem, at the obsequies of some
personage in the centre who is distinguished by a huge feathered snake
which overshadows him. Many of the figures are accompanied by glyphs
which are distinctly Nahua in type, while their ornaments and dress
combine both Nahua and Maya characters; further, a sun-disc in Nahua
style occurs at the top of the relief. In the Castillo are atlantean
figures carved in relief in similar style, and in the Temple of the
Tables were found a number of slabs supported by small caryatides (Fig.
84), carved in the round, exactly similar to some which have been
found at Tlaxcala. Finally, several stone recumbent figures supporting
vases, of the type shown on Pl. VIII, 2; p. 74, have been discovered
buried in the neighbourhood.[8] The buildings themselves, as far as
preserved, present, architecturally speaking, Maya characteristics,
except the large site with the numerous square columns, which probably
supported a flat roof laid on transverse beams. To the west and south
of the buildings first described are many unexplored mounds,
probably the remains of the earliest settlement of all, and it is in
one of these that a slab bearing a date in the long count, but later
than any in the central area, has been discovered. Thus we appear to
have three, or possibly four, periods represented at Chichen Itza,
the first by the mounds where the initial date was found, the second
and possible third by the Monjas group with its reconstructions in
typical Yucatec style, the last by the northern group with its definite
“Toltec” affinities. It is to be noted that this corresponds in a most
remarkable manner with the Tutul Xiu tradition. The first settlement
would be that of which they heard when they were yet at Balcalar, the
second and doubtful third periods would represent their own occupation
and reoccupation, while the last would illustrate the result of the
Nahua influx which brought about the fall of the league of Mayapan.
The other date in the long count which has been found in the Yucatec
area is at Tulum. This is a very early date, in the sixth katun of the
ninth cycle, and may possibly relate to some event in past history.
At any rate it supports the evidence furnished by Chichen Itza that
the Maya peoples who reckoned by the long count and built the cities
of the central area had penetrated into Yucatan before the arrival of
the Tutul Xiu. Tulum has not yet been satisfactorily explored, but the
buildings there are neither imposing nor richly decorated; the site
however presents one feature of interest in so far as it is surrounded
on three sides by a wall, the fourth being protected by the sea.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXVIII_

   _Photo. C. R. Waite_

  MAYA

  THE TEMPLE OF THE BALL-COURT (LEFT) AND THE “CASTILLO,”
  AT CHICHEN ITZA, YUCATAN. (_See Plate XXIX, 1_)]

Uxmal, which, according to the Tutul Xiu account, was founded from
Chichen Itza, shows, as regards the majority of its buildings, a very
close correspondence with the Monjas group of the latter site. Most of
the buildings exhibit the true Yucatec character, including the mosaic
masks with projecting “trunks,” and pilastered ornament is also found.
A few however do not show these characteristics to the same degree,
and present abnormal varieties of cornice, while others display signs
of alteration and modification which imply at least that the site was
inhabited for a considerable period. The most striking buildings,
perhaps the finest in the true Yucatec style which exist, are the
so-called “House of the Governor” (Pl. XXX; p. 358), the “Temple of the
Magician,” peculiar in its oblong pyramid with rounded corners (Fig.
73, _h_; p. 321),[9] and the “House of the Doves,” distinguished
by a vandyked roof-comb ornamented with open-work tracery. Lack of
space forbids allusion to the many other Yucatec sites, such as Labna,
Sayil, Kabah, and so forth, but it may be said that they embody similar
forms of decoration such as the grotesque mosaic mask, and geometrical
and pilastered ornament (Pl. XXV, 1; p. 332), though the structures can
hardly be said to compare with those of Chichen Itza and Uxmal.

As regards British Honduras, mention has already been made of the
interesting building at Santa Rita, decorated with frescoes somewhat
akin in style to those at Mitla, though rather nearer the true Maya
in type. It is difficult not to see in this art an extension of
the “Toltec” influence so evident at Chichen Itza, combined with a
stronger element of the local Maya art. But buildings in this region
are few, though the substructures of former edifices are common. On
the Colombia branch of the Rio Grande is found an extensive two-tiered
foundation-mound, supporting a number of stepped pyramids, which recall
to some extent the site of Uxmal, in so far as the corners of most
are rounded. Both mound and pyramids are faced with cut stone, and
quantities of brick are also found which appear to have been used as
hearting and paving material.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXIX_

  1

   _Photo. Dr. A. P. Maudslay_

  2

  MAYA

  1. RESTORATION OF THE BALL-COURT TEMPLE AT CHICHEN ITZA,
  YUCATAN; AFTER MAUDSLAY. (_See Plate XXVIII_)

  2. BUILDINGS OF THE “MONJAS” GROUP, CHICHEN ITZA,
  YUCATAN]

One of the most interesting ruins of British Honduras consists of a
huge mound near Benque Viejo, sixty feet high and built of limestone,
which supports a three-storeyed stone building. This is surrounded
by three others of similar type, at the foot of each of which is a
plain stone monolith, recalling the plain stelæ mentioned above, which
doubtless were once ornamented with painted designs. The ruins of this
site probably belong to the same series as Tikal, Naranjo, Seibal,
etc., and though more excavation, combined with accurate surveying, is
necessary before we can speak with confidence regarding the monuments
of British Honduras as a whole, we may assume that they fall into two
classes, viz. ruins connected with the early central Maya area, those
to the north of British Honduras at Tulum being in part a “provincial”
extension of the early culture,[10] and later edifices which owed their
birth to Toltec influence filtered southward through Yucatan.

In the west of the Maya area, the remains, though plentiful, are
inferior in quality, and have not attracted the attention of explorers
to the extent which their importance, as indicating the spread of Maya
culture, and its relation to that of Oaxaca, deserves. Sacchana and its
neighbourhood is a site of great interest, since Seler has discovered
there two stone slabs bearing initial dates in the Maya style, falling
just each side of the date at Chichen Itza, which is otherwise the
latest known. The style of these slabs is rude and decadent, but they
are of the highest importance as indicating that the early method of
reckoning time had spread as far west at least as the department of
Huehuetenango. Otherwise the remains of this district are rude and
coarsely built, of unsquared blocks usually without mortar; but mortar
is found in some cases, notably in the tlaxtli-courts, which, as well
as the pyramidal mounds, bear a very close resemblance to those of
Quiengola in Oaxaca (p. 175). A feature of this district is constituted
by the number of cave-temples, which again recall the last-named
province of Mexico. It is perhaps worthy of mention that a tendency
appears in this neighbourhood to arrange temple-mounds in groups of
three, in a straight line from north to south, with the stairways
facing west. The western position of pyramid stairways, which implies
that the worshippers faced east, has already been observed in Oaxaca
and Mexico. An account of certain ruins at Utatlan, Iximché and Rabinal
is given in the works of Maudslay, but they cannot compare with those
of the central Maya area, and seem rather to resemble those of the
district of Huehuetenango.

The Maya appear to have resorted occasionally to caves as
dwelling-places, and certain investigations have been made in caverns
at Copan and Loltun (immediately south of Uxmal), in Yucatan. The
remains however do not imply that their occupation was of early date,
and it is probable that the caves served as places of temporary refuge
in times of war. This chapter would be incomplete without some mention
of the peculiar bottle-shaped subterranean structures found at certain
sites in Yucatan. These are known as “chultunes,” and, since they
invariably occur at places remote from rivers, may almost certainly
be regarded as cisterns for preserving a supply of water, though in
some cases they have served the secondary purpose of burial chambers.
They are lined with dressed stone or a coat of stucco, and the mouth
is furnished with a stone ring which is closed by a slab. Careful
exploration of the chultunes at Labna has been made by Thompson and
reported in the “Memoirs” of the Peabody Museum.

  [Illustration:

    FIG. 85.--Stone gargoyle, Copan.

  (_After Gordon_)]

It will be unnecessary to enter into a discussion of Maya art, since
the subject has been fully treated by Spinden in a monograph which was
published only a week or so before this chapter was written, and,
moreover, much may be gathered from the preceding pages supplemented by
the illustrations. The kinship of the stone reliefs with wood-carving,
except at Copan and Quirigua, has already been indicated, and the
symbolic nature of Maya ornament is too obvious to need especial
mention. Attention may be called to the use of glyphs, extremely
ornamental in themselves, to give balance to a design, and to the
_horror vacui_ which appears in all reliefs except those of
Palenque. Though bound by convention, the result in a large measure
of the symbolic nature of his designs, the Maya artist occupies a
relatively high plane amongst barbarous peoples. In particular the
quality of his line is excellent, even in stone, and in certain
respects, notably foreshortening (especially in the treatment of
feathers, for which see Figs. 61 and 87; pp. 297 and 367), he was
superior to the sculptor of Egypt or Assyria. One peculiarity of Maya
art lies in the fact that the artist was obsessed by the motive of
the serpent (rattle-snake) head. In nearly all its essentials this
design appears in the remarkable gargoyle from Copan shown in Fig.
85. We have here the exaggerated upper jaw, the front fang, and the
curl at the corner of the mouth. One detail is lacking, viz. the
nose-ornaments which were usually added to the reptile. Maudslay has
shown how derivatives of this design, often modified almost beyond
identification, are constantly applied to every form of ornament,
such as the edges of girdle-flaps and so forth, and the point has
been elaborated by Spinden. Most interesting is the almost invariable
occurrence of the serpent-motive on the wings of birds (e.g. Figs. 48
and 49; pp. 225 and 230), the combination no doubt expressing the high
god Kukulkan, who, among the early Maya, seems to have been represented
only in this indirect way (see p. 226). In the later art, especially
that exhibiting Toltec affinities, we have a more direct delineation
of the deity in the shape of a human figure whose face is surrounded
by the jaws of a serpent, but who is provided with wings carved in the
best Maya style (Fig. 87). The foreshortening of feathers has already
been mentioned, but it may be added that perhaps no people has shown
in its art such an appreciation of this form of ornament as the Maya,
and for sheer beauty the feather-motive shares the honours with the
plant-design (see Fig. 60; p. 289), often shown in combination with
fishes and grotesque masks, which appears not only on the sculptures,
but also in the frescoes.




                       CHAPTER XIV--CONCLUSIONS


It is obvious that the two forms of culture described in the foregoing
chapters, Mexican and Maya, were at least very closely related the
one to the other; but it is equally obvious that the connection was
closer between the Maya and the pre-Aztec inhabitants of the Mexican
valley than between the former and the Aztec. Religion in both areas
ran on similar lines, and the pantheons included certain more or less
otiose high gods, and a rain and thunder agricultural-deity whose
worship was of primary importance. The importance of blood-offerings,
combined with the late introduction of human sacrifice, the existence
of a ritual and solar calendar, both similar in nature, and the habit
of constructing buildings of ceremonial importance on lofty pyramidal
mounds or terraces are features common to both. Besides this, as far
as the later Maya are concerned, we find traditions of a historical
nature which make mention of places, such as Tulan and the Seven
Caves, which occur in Mexican legends, and at Chichen Itza, where at
least one section of the population traced their origin to “Tulan,”
we have ruins corresponding exactly in style to those found at the
pre-Aztec site Tulan in the Mexican valley. Other similarities relating
to material culture are equally numerous, as well as similarities in
art and symbolism. Many of these have already received attention,
but, as a further illustration of the latter, mention may be made
of a small detail which is of comparatively frequent appearance on
sculptures throughout the Mexican and Mayan area. This consists of a
trapezoidal figure interlaced with a triangle or another trapezium,
and occurs usually as a head-ornament. A series of its manifestations
is illustrated in Fig. 86. Here the earlier monuments where it appears
are represented by Copan (_a_), Menché (_c_), Piedras Negras (_b_) (for
Naranjo see Pl. XXIII; p. 302); in Yucatan it occurs at Uxmal (_g_);
on the fringe of the Mexican valley, at Tehuacan (_d_) and Xochicalco
(_e_); in the valley itself, at Tenango (_k_), Xico (_m_), and, to the
north, at Tulan (_h_); and in the Huaxtec country, at Teayo (_f_).
The sign moreover bears a close analogy to that by which the Aztec
expressed the period of a year (_l_), and the triangular portion of
it is exactly similar to a conventional sun-ray. It is perhaps worth
noting that at Copan, Uxmal and Teayo it is associated with the head
of the rain-god. The significance of this symbol is obscure, but its
presence over so large an area can hardly be due to coincidence.

  [Illustration: FIG. 86.--Details from various
  monuments showing the interlaced head-ornament.

    _a._ Copan, stela 6.
    _b._ Piedras Negras.
    _c._ Menché.
    _d._ Tehuacan.
    _e._ Xochicalco.
    _f._ Teayo.
    _g._ Uxmal.
    _h._ Tulan.
    _k._ Tenango.
    _l._ The Mexican year-sign. (_Zouche MS._)
    _m._ Island of Xico.]

I think it is obvious from what has gone before, that the Aztec may
be left out of account in any consideration of the source of such
similarities as may be traced in Mexican and Mayan culture. They were
admittedly late immigrants, from the north, into the Mexican valley,
and were, at the time of their arrival, in a very low state of culture;
moreover, as stated above, it is the pre-Aztec remains which show the
closest relation to the Mayan. The question therefore resolves itself
into an enquiry which was the earlier, the culture exemplified in
the ruins of the central Maya area, or that which gave birth to the
pre-Aztec remains at such early valley sites as Tulan, Teotihuacan and
Azcapotzalco? Any solution of this question must also fix the relation
of Oaxaca to both, and account for the Huaxtec, a Maya-speaking people
whose sculptures bear no trace of a hieroglyphic script. Included
in this question is that of the origin of the calendar. Let me say
at once that the evidence at our disposal is not sufficient to
permit these questions to be answered with certainty. Much patient
excavation, both in the Mexican valley and in the central Mayan region,
is necessary before the origin of the pre-Spanish civilization can
be traced with any degree of finality; but I think it is possible to
put forward a working theory, which must of necessity be modified
in accordance with future researches, but which may at least be of
service to critics as an invitation to concentrate their minds upon the
subject. It is solely with this idea that I have ventured to draw up a
scheme of dating (see Appendix III), and I will deal with this first,
pointing out its weaknesses with as much impartiality as possible.

  [Illustration:

    _PLATE XXX_

   _Photo. Guerra_

  MAYA

  THE “HOUSE OF THE GOVERNOR,” UXMAL, YUCATAN]

First of all I should like to say that the dates are not intended to
be more than approximate; even the records of Mexican history are not
in absolute accordance, and contradictions become more frequent and
serious in proportion with the remoteness of particular events from
the date of the conquest. However, the history of the valley can be
compiled with some degree of probability when the different accounts
are studied from the point of view detailed on p. 19, though the dates
of Toltec history, before the fall of the city, are in the highest
degree problematical. The books of Chilan Balam give a chronology for
the history of the Tutul Xiu which can be related to European time,
though they do not agree exactly among themselves, and interpolations
of a whole cycle appear to occur in places. The dating which I have
adopted, which is in the main that of the book of Chilan Balam of
Mani, is a conservative interpretation of these records, and may, I
believe, be credited with reasonable probability. The dating of the
monuments, the most important question of all, is unfortunately the
most problematical, and the chain of evidence by which I seek to
assign them a place in chronology has two weak links, one considerably
weaker than the other. The first of these is the assumption that
the initial dates on stelæ refer to the erection of the monuments in
question. In considering this question I would omit Palenque, which
is obviously, from the architectural and artistic point of view, one
of the latest ruins in the central Mayan area. Further, the dates do
not occur on stelæ, but for the most part on mural tablets in temples,
and may well be “mythical,” and based upon calculations into past
time made at a period when the art of chronology, if such a phrase
be permitted, had attained a great development in the hands of a
specialist priesthood. At other sites the fact that the dates form
more or less connected series, and correspond on the whole to the
development of architecture, lends a certain probability to the theory
that they are “historical” and the theory receives some support, in a
negative way, from the extreme difficulty of assigning them any other
reasonable function. The other link, which I frankly admit is far
weaker, consists in an attempt to correlate them with the dating of the
books of Chilan Balam, and this I will now explain. I have tried to
show that the buildings at Chichen Itza may be divided into three main
classes, corresponding in a rather remarkable manner to the principal
epochs of Tutul Xiu tradition; and I have pointed out that what may
be considered the earliest group is distinguished by a date in the
“long count” characteristic of the central Mayan region. I have also
explained that there is reason to believe that Chichen was inhabited
before the arrival of the Tutul Xiu, and the presence of the early Maya
in Yucatan is supported by the “long count” date at Tulum. It seems
probable that the Tutul Xiu themselves did not use the long count, but
reckoned time, as in the books of Chilan Balam, by the “short count,”
i.e. by the initial day of the katun alone. It is an interesting fact
that in more than one of the versions we find a statement that, after
their arrival at Chichen Itza, “Pop was first counted in order,” with
the variant “Pop was set in order,” and this is, I think, capable of
explanation in one of two ways. In the first place, it may refer to
some change in the calendar, necessitated by the fact that the absence
of intercalary days had brought the commencement of the year noticeably
out of tune with the seasons. In the second, it may indicate the actual
adoption of the early Maya month-system, which they found prevailing at
Chichen. We may assume, from what evidence exists, that the month-names
were never expressed in dating in the Mexican valley, and we know that
the Tutul Xiu placed their original home within the realm of “Tulan.”
It may be remarked in passing that, whichever explanation be adopted,
this was probably the occasion when the change in the “year-bearers,”
from the early system to the later, was made, and it may further be
noted that such a change would not necessarily affect the katun count.
In any case the essential point on which I would lay stress is that the
initial date at Chichen belongs to the period before the arrival of the
Tutul Xiu. Now the katun expressed in this initial date would be termed
in the short count “katun 3. ahau,” and I think it reasonable to assume
that this corresponds with the last “katun 3. ahau” of the Tutul Xiu
chronology _before_ they arrived at Chichen Itza. It may of course
be earlier, but I think this extremely unlikely, having regard to the
similarity between such buildings as the Monjas group and those of the
central Mayan area. If this assumption be admitted, then the dates of
the monuments can be brought into line with historical chronology as
appears in the Appendix.

From this it follows that the inhabitants of the Mexican valley
received the calendar from the Maya, but, before accepting such a
proposition, it will be as well to examine the calendar itself for
contributory evidence. We have seen that the Zapotec calendar forms
a most important link between the day-signs of the Mexican and Maya
respectively, and the suggestion has been made by Seler that the Maya
obtained these day-signs from the west _via_ Oaxaca, calling
attention to the comparatively simple nature of the Zapotec signs,
which agree in this respect with those of Mexico. The Mexican valley
as the place of origin of the day-signs may be, I think, disregarded,
if only for the reason that certain of the animals serving as such do
not occur in that region, and the choice therefore would lie between
Oaxaca on the one hand and the central Mayan region on the other. Now
the difference in form between the Mexican and Zapotec signs can be
explained in many cases by the fact that the Zapotec term is equivocal.
That being so, it seems to me obvious that the Zapotec must have
borrowed from the Maya and not _vice versa_. My argument is as
follows: The Zapotec signs are simple and obvious; those of the Maya
are often highly conventionalized. It would be remarkable, therefore,
that the Maya should have translated the Zapotec name in the wrong
sense, while it would be perfectly natural for the Zapotec to have
made a mistake and to have simplified the sign in accordance with
their idea of the meaning of the term. If we add to this the fact that
the only two initial dates discovered in the western Maya area are,
together with the Chichen date, the latest known, the conclusion seems
to me inevitable that early Maya culture, enumeration, and calendar
spread together from Guatemala, through Oaxaca to the Tlalhuica
country (Xochicalco) and the Mexican valley, becoming attenuated in
the process. The question of the development of the calendar itself
is interesting. The whole system seems to show traces of several
modifications and to exemplify the efforts of a primitive people to
adapt their chronology to solar time. The presence of five nemontemi
or uayeb days over and above the period of 360 bears the stamp of an
afterthought, while the 360-day period, of eighteen months, each of
which comprises a full round of the day-signs, is complete in itself
and suggests that this was the original “year.” The number of the
day-signs, viz. twenty, is obviously based upon the vigesimal system
of counting current among these peoples, but the selection of the
thirteen numerals which accompany them has not yet been satisfactorily
explained. As remarked before, it is obvious that an agricultural
population would soon observe that the seasons gradually became out of
harmony with the year, and they must have cast about to find some check
by which the discrepancy could be corrected. This check they found in
the synodical revolutions of the planet Venus. We know that the Aztec
and Maya both calculated the reappearance of this planet (as seen in
the codex Borgia and analogous MSS., and the Dresden codex), and the
glyph which has been identified as that of the morning star appears
upon the early monuments. It is worth noting that the early Maya method
of calculating time, by means of a long count of days rather than by
years, rendered the discrepancy of comparatively small account. The
lack of harmony between the year and true solar time would, it is
true, affect the seasonal feasts, but these could be transferred from
month to month as occasion demanded. As said before, I believe the
greater proportion of the inscriptions embody calculations which had as
their object the due allocation of the feasts to the proper seasons.
I have already made the suggestion that the previous “suns” marking
world-periods may typify periodical rearrangements of the calendar to
square with solar time, and it is to be noted that both in the Aztec
and in the Quiché account the tribes await the rising of the sun while
observing the morning star. The first rising of the sun, awaited
with such impatience by Aztec, Quiché and Kakchiquel alike, means, I
believe, the adoption of the solar calendar, or rather the fixing of a
date to form a starting-point for a time-count modelled on solar time;
and in the legends of the two first peoples, the morning star is the
herald of the “dawn,” which in the Aztec myth is called the “dawn for
the administration of society.” The Kakchiquel account seems to hint
that the “dawn” was not the same for all the tribes of this people. The
translation runs as follows: “Three of our tribes had seen the dawn
appear, the Zotzil, the Kakchiquel and the Tukuchi. As for the Akahal
they were but a little distance from the place when the dawn appeared
to the three nations. At the spot called Tohohil the Quiché saw their
dawn, and those of Rabinal saw it at Zamaneb; and the Tzutuhil sought
to see their dawn at Tzala, but their labours had not been completed
by this tribe when the sun arose. They had not yet finished drawing
their lines in Tzala when it arose in the sky, precisely above the
place Geletat.” The last sentence at least suggests that some process
analogous to observation of the solstice is implied. I think that the
passages relative to the appearance of the “dawn” in the various tribal
legends are worth careful study, especially in view of the fact that
no entirely satisfactory translations of the annals of Xahila and the
Popol Vuh exist. As for the books of Chilan Balam, no mention of a
“dawn” is made, but it may be argued that the statement “Pop was first
counted in order” has the same essential meaning.[11]

The reason for the decline of the early Maya civilization is rather
obscure. A glance at the scheme of dating will show how closely the
last dates at each of the ruined sites correspond one with another.
It does not of course follow that the cessation of initial dates
implies the abandonment of the “cities,” for they may have been centres
of religious life for years later; indeed Cichen was visited as a
sacred place until Spanish times, and the Lacandons of to-day still
make offerings in the deserted temples. But the abrupt termination
of the dating system at least implies some important change, and it
may be that about the beginning of the tenth cycle the “long count”
was abandoned in favour of the “katun count” as exemplified in the
books of Chilan Balam. In any case none of the buildings show evident
signs of forcible destruction, and no traces of a military invasion of
Maya territory appear. The instability of Central American political
organizations is very marked; there was a strong tendency for a state,
composed originally of independent self-contained pueblos, to split
up into smaller elements under the slightest pressure applied from
within or without. The Maya, to judge from the monuments, had enjoyed
centuries of peace, and only in the north-east and north do we find
reliefs which give any hint of war. But these may be significant, and
no doubt the decline of the old culture was due to pressure exercised
by their northern neighbours, a pressure which had its origin in the
steady southerly drift of tribes from regions considerably further
north, and which led to the occupation of the Mexican valley by the
Nahua-speaking Toltec.

A word may now be said concerning the “Toltec” culture of the Mexican
valley. The fact that this is related to the early culture of the
Maya is, as said before, obvious. Many points of similarity exist in
religious symbolism, art (such as the interlaced trapezoidal sign
described above), glyphs surrounded by a cartouche, and the bar-form
of the numeral five. If my dating of the monuments be accepted
provisionally, and also the suggestion that the calendar had its origin
with the Maya, then it follows necessarily that the Toltec culture
was due at least to Maya inspiration. The myth of the arrival of the
god Quetzalcoatl, inventor of the calendar, symbolizes the spread
of Maya culture northwards. There are so many instances of the god
being taken as the representative of his people, and I have already
shown how the high mysterious creator-god Kukulkan seems to have lost
dignity when he became personified as a tribal leader. The myth of
the immigrant Nahua tribes awaiting the “dawn for the administration
of society” at Teotihuacan then represents their first contact with
the culture derived from the Maya. So far the matter is simple, but
a difficulty now arises. The last Maya date in the long count, at
Chacula on the Chiapas border, falls about the middle of the fourth
century A.D. The Annals of Quauhtitlan give the foundation
of the Toltec state as 752 A.D. The migration-myth last
mentioned states that the Toltec were with the other Nahua immigrants
at Teotihuacan when the “dawn” appeared. These Toltec are definitely
stated to have been Nahua-speakers, while the name of the first Toltec
ruler, Mixcoamazatzin, is distinctly Nahua. Finally, the list of Toltec
rulers, seven only in number, is far too short to account for the
thick stratum of Toltec remains at Azcapotzalco. The only explanation
possible surely must be the following: The early Maya culture had
slowly crept up into the Mexican valley, through western Chiapas,
Oaxaca and Teotitlan, becoming somewhat attenuated in the process.
There it persisted for some centuries without striking development,
and perhaps gradually deteriorating. Then began the southerly drift
of the Nahua tribes, of whom the first to arrive, the Toltec, imposed
themselves as a ruling caste upon the agricultural population, adopting
their mode of life and culture, and developing the latter in accordance
with their own particular genius, but imposing their own language upon
the tribes whom they welded into an empire. But the pressure from the
north continued, wave after wave of “Chichimec” migration broke upon
the valley. The Toltec power fell, and the incursion of the wilder
tribes gave rise to migrations, such as those of the Olmec, Quiché
and Kakchiquel, which followed for the most part an easterly route,
at any rate in their initial stages. In the valley, the history of
the Toltec was reflected in the short-lived attempts of the Chichimec
and Tepanec to establish empires, but was practically repeated by the
Aztec, who also developed, and to some extent travestied, the remnants
of the earlier culture of their predecessors. The fall of Tulan had an
important effect upon Yucatan. At this period the League of Mayapan
was in full flower, but within a century we hear of the introduction
of “Mexican” mercenaries, and of political troubles at Chichen Itza,
and at this very site we find a group of buildings in unmistakable
Toltec style, with decoration in which a personified Kukulkan appears.
This Toltec influence spread further still, to British Honduras,
where it is exemplified in the frescoes of Santa Rita, and in certain
pottery vases (Pl. IX, 10; p. 82) with relief ornament in the shape
of a descending Quetzalcoatl-Kukulkan figure, similar to the Chichen
Itza relief shown in Fig. 87. In the Mixtec country, too, traces of
immigration occur in legends, almost certainly due to the same causes,
and the Toltec influence is found in the frescoes at Mitla, which
resemble those at Santa Rita, though, be it noted, they are by no means
necessarily contemporary with the buildings on which they occur. Thus
the Maya culture completed its circle, a branch passing, as I have
indicated, from Guatemala to the Mexican valley, and then through Vera
Cruz and Tabasco to Yucatan, where it came into contact with a more
legitimate offshoot of the early Maya stock. In the west the wave of
Toltec influence appears to have reached as far south as Santa Lucia
Cozumalhuapa, and the presence of tlaxtli-courts in the Chacula and
Alta Vera Paz regions are probably to be attributed to the same agency;
for it will be remembered that a body of Toltec, after the fall of
their city, are reported to have migrated to Soconusco (p. 11).

  [Illustration: FIG. 87.--Stone relief at Chichen
  Itza, showing Kukulkan-Quetzalcoatl. (_After Maudslay_)]

The position of the Huaxtec now arises. In them we have a Maya-speaking
people, practising certain definitely Maya customs such as tooth-filing
and -inlay, and inhumation as opposed to cremation, yet apparently
without a script. As far as their art is concerned, the sculptures of
the Panuco valley bear a closer resemblance to those of the Maya,
especially to certain stelæ at Piedras Negras, than the Aztec. The
isolation of this definitely Maya branch would seem to imply that the
Maya in the earliest days of all must have spread from Guatemala up
the east coast of Mexico as far as Tampico, penetrating into Chiapas,
and possibly Oaxaca, and colonizing the Mexican valley, where they
found a primitive people akin to the earliest population of Michoacan.
In times subsequent to what I may call this proto-Maya movement there
took place in the southern fertile region a great cultural development,
culminating in the organization of a calendar, the invention of a
script, and the construction of the ruined “cities.” The culture
developed here spread, as I have indicated on p. 361, but slowly,
since the land was by no means overpopulated, and life was easy. For
some reason it took a westerly course, _via_ Oaxaca, and never
reached the Huaxtec, who remained confined to the coast by the eastern
cordillera and held little communication with their western neighbours.
In later times, at any rate, they were cut off from the southern Maya
by the stream of migration which passed from the valley of Mexico and
its neighbourhood eastward, and they may well have been isolated at
an earlier period by some similar movement in this direction. At any
rate an early tendency towards migration on these lines is seen in
the legends of the Tutal Xiu, who left Nonoual in the second century,
probably under pressure exercised by tribes to the west.

The chief objection to this theory of the origin and development of the
Maya culture, as far as I can see, is that in Guatemala and Honduras no
certain traces of a proto-Maya culture have as yet been discovered, but
that the civilization springs, as it were, full-blown from the earth.
The answer would be that the finest ruins have focussed all attention
up to the present, and that earlier manifestations of the culture have
not been sought, while the difficulties afforded by environment and
climate place serious obstacles in the way of systematic excavation.
Further, the art itself affords many indications that it is based upon
wood-carving, and the conditions are not favourable to the survival of
any remains save those constructed in stone.

The position which must be assigned to the Zapotec raises a question of
considerable interest. Their indebtedness to Maya culture is obvious
from the consideration of a large proportion of their architectural
remains and their art, but certain peculiar features make their
appearance. In the first place, no migration legends are recorded,
while the fact that certain localities were held to be the entrance
to the underworld rather emphasizes the “indigenous” nature of the
population. Again, though cremation makes its appearance among the
later Maya, the Zapotec, for religious reasons, held out against it,
practising, in the main, secondary burial. Finally, certain forms of
ornament applied to architecture (as at Mitla) and to pottery (as at
Cuicatlan) are unique in this part of America. Of interest is the
fact that the geometric ornament at Mitla finds an exact parallel
in the stucco decoration of some of the early ruins of the Peruvian
coast, while the designs of the Cuicatlan pottery reproduce with
equal exactness a favourite textile ornament belonging to the same
region. Certain of the Peruvian coast-dwellers preserved traditions
of immigration by sea, and these combined facts might be taken as a
vague indication of early coasting-voyages down the west coast of
America. It would be rash to put this forward as a definite theory,
but at any rate further investigations in this direction might prove
of great interest. The Zapotec at one period seem to have extended
considerably further north than in later times, and to have been
driven south by the Mixtec who at least contained an immigrant
element. The peculiar slab discovered at Placeres del Oro seems to
bear some affinity with Zapotec reliefs, but here again the “Peruvian”
character of the decoration is paramount. Affinities with Peruvian
archæology extend into Michoacan, where the practice of providing the
mummy-pack of the dead with a false head prevailed, and similarities
with Peruvian beliefs may be seen in the Mexican custom of providing
the deceased with a dog to convey his soul to the underworld, and
in ill-treating dogs during eclipses of the moon. Resemblances also
exist between the Peruvian and Maya cultures; certain stone reliefs
showing a figure seated in a niche have been found at Manabi in Ecuador
(where again traditions of immigration by sea survive), which look
very like travesties of some of the Piedras Negras stelæ; while the
famous monolith discovered at Chavin de Huantar in the Andes bears
a very distinct “Maya” stamp, though it is related also to the art
of the Nasca valley. But great caution is necessary in dealing with
similarities of this nature, which may arise from no more than a common
psychology, and may bear witness only to the “American” basis shared by
both cultures.

With the possible relations which Mexican and Maya culture may bear
to those of the outer world I do not propose to deal at all. The past
has shown the futility of speculating upon insufficient evidence, and
it is sad to note how large a proportion of the literature dealing
with American archæology serves only as a monument to wasted energy
and misplaced zeal. It is impossible to deny a certain superficial
similarity, often surprising, between the Maya ruins and those of
south-east Asia, but these disappear for the most part upon closer
analysis. Mere similarity of ornament means nothing when the ornament
in question is found to symbolize beliefs of an entirely different
character; from the constructional point of view the buildings differ
essentially; while the absolute gulf which separates the American
language, calendrical system and vegetable means of sustenance from
those of Asia provides difficulties which must be explained before any
theory suggesting contact in any form can legitimately be put forward.
The question of the ultimate origin of the American population lies
beyond the scope of this book, but it is an evident fact that the
Americans physically stand in comparatively close relation to the
Asiatics. That being so a somewhat similar psychology is natural, and
this would lead, subject to modifications produced by environment, to
the evolution of a culture and art in which certain analogies might
be expected to appear. But what I have elsewhere written of Peruvian
culture applies with equal force to that of the Mexicans and Maya. The
_onus probandi_ must necessarily be upon those who wish to prove
that contact with the external world existed, and the evidence which we
possess points rather to the undisturbed evolution of Mexican and Mayan
civilization on American soil, and that civilization may therefore be
regarded as in every sense American.




                              APPENDIX I

          NAMES OF THE DAYS IN THE MEXICAN AND MAYA CALENDARS


                  MAYA                    MEXICAN
                   |
    /-------------/ \--------------\
              Tzental    Quiché and
    Yucatan   (Chiapas)  Kakchiquel        Aztec

    Imix        Imox        Imox          Cipactli
    Ik          Igh         Ig            Eecatl
    Akbal       Votan       Akbal         Calli
    Kan         Ghanan      Kat           Quetzpalin
    Chicchan    Abah        Can           Coatl
    Cimi        Tox         Camey         Miquiztli
    Manik       Mozic       Quieh         Mazatl
    Lamat       Lambat      Ganel         Tochtli
    Muluc       Mulu        Toh           Atl
    Oc          Elab        Tzii          Itzcuintli
    Chuen       Batz        Batz          Ozomatli
    Eb          Enob        Balam         Malinalli
    Ben         Been        Ah            Acatl
    Ix          Hix         Itz           Ocelotl
    Men         Tziquin     Tziquin       Quauhtli
    Cib         Chabin      Ahmak         Cozcaquauhtli
    Caban       Chic        Noh           Olin
    Eznab       Chinax      Tihax         Tecpatl
    Cauac       Cahogh      Caok          Quiauitl
    Ahau        Aghual      Hunahpu       Xochitl




                              APPENDIX II

         NAMES OF THE MONTHS IN THE MEXICAN AND MAYA CALENDARS


                   MAYA                         MEXICAN
                    |
    /--------------/ \---------------\
      Yucatan          Kakchiquel                Aztec
    Pop (July 16)  Tacaxepual (Feb. 1)    Atlcaualco (Feb. 2)
    Uo             Nabey Tumuzuz          Tlacaxipeualiztli
    Zip            Rucan Tumuzuz          Tozoztontli
    Zotz           Zibix                  Uei Tozoztli
    Tzec           Uchum                  Toxcatl
    Xul            Nabey Mam              Etzalqualiztli
    Yaxkin         Rucab Mam              Tecuiluitontli
    Mol            Likinka                Uei Tecuiluitl
    Chen           Nabey Tok              Tlaxochimaco
    Yax            Rucab Tok              Xocouetzi
    Zac            Nabey Pach             Ochpaniztli
    Ceh            Rucab Pach             Teotleco
    Mac            Tziquin Kih            Tepeiluitl
    Kankin         Cakan                  Quecholli
    Muan           Ibota                  Panquetzaliztli
    Pax            Katik                  Atemoztli
    Kayab          Itzcal Kih             Tititl
    Cumhu          Pariche                Izcalli
    _Uayeh_        _Tzapi Kih_            _Nemontemi_




                                 INDEX


    Acamapitzin, 19, 20, 101, 120

    Acocolco, 14, 17, 18

    Acolhua, 11, 14, 16, 17, 20, 21, 36, 104

    Acolhuatzin, 16, 19

    agriculture, 164, 165, 271, 298

    Ahau Chamahez, 224

    Ahau-Quiché, 207, 220

    Ah Bolon Tzacab, 220, 221, 263, 264

    Ahcanul, 206

    Ahchel, 206

    Ahchun Caan, 220

    Ahchuykak, 224

    Ahcitz, 221

    Ahkak Nexoi, 221

    Ahmekat Tutul Xiu, 205

    Ahpua, 221

    Ahpula, 204

    Ahulneb, 220–224

    Ah-uuk-chek-nale, 233

    Ahzuitok Tutul Xiu, 205

    Akahal, 363

    Akanum, 221

    Alta Vera Paz, 194, 276, 286, 296, 298, 302, 309, 311–317, 367

    Amalcum, 221

    Amapan, 166

    Amazon, R., 312

    Amimitl, 32, 54, 100

    amusements, 165–168, 301–303

    Anonymous Conqueror, 105, 112

    Antilles, 203, 229

    aqueduct, 160, 336

    architecture, 157–160, 169–184, 303, 304, 319–354, 369

    atamalqualiztli, 73

    atemoztli, 72

    Atitlan, 200, 202, 208, 284

    Atlatonan, 46

    Atlaua, 32

    atlcaualco, 65

    Atlixco, 194

    Auitzotl, 25, 26, 81, 88, 127, 171

    Avilix, 220

    Axayacatl, 24, 25, 115, 120, 125, 143, 158

    axe, ceremonial, 236–238, 338

    Ayopechtli, 54

    Azcapotzalco, 11, 12, 16, 18–21, 53, 110, 120, 126, 144, 188, 356,
        365

    Aztlan, 12–14, 16


    Bacabs, 220, 236, 238, 247, 260, 263–267, 269

    Badjok, 128

    Balam-Agab, 207, 280

    Balam-Quitzé, 207, 280

    Balcalar, 205, 214, 297, 349

    Baquahol, 212

    Basongo Meno, 128

    beds, 159

    bee-keeping, 243, 267, 268, 299

    Benque Viejo, 276, 307, 351

    birth, 160, 224

    blood-offerings. _See_ penitential rite

    Borgia codex, 234, 257, 362

    Boturini codex, 14

    Breton, Miss A., 334

    Brinton, Prof. D. G., 97, 281, 282

    British Honduras, 179, 195, 228, 276, 277, 305, 307, 309, 311,
        315–318, 320, 334, 350, 351, 366

    Burgoa, 28, 101, 107, 125, 179, 228

    burial, 103–108, 138, 275–278, 352, 367, 369, 370

    Bushongo, 128


    Cablahuh Tihax, 213

    Cacamatzin, 26

    calendar, 47, 52, 59–79, 86, 88, 245–259, 263–271, 355, 356,
        360–363, 368

    Calendar Stone, 27, 50, 66, 73

    Calmecac, 47, 90, 93, 94, 122, 123, 130, 162

    calpulli, 89, 115–117, 126, 282

    Camaxtli, 32, 33, 45, 56, 83, 125

    Camazotz, 232, 242

    Campeche, 199, 200, 220, 261, 262, 297

    cannibalism, 67, 82

    canoes, 203, 299, 300

    causeways, 159

    Cavek, 207, 220, 281

    caves, 277, 294, 317, 352

    Cavizimah, 210

    Cay Batz, 212

    Cay Noh, 212

    Ce Acatl, 32, 46

    Cempoala, 182

    censers, 186, 188, 273, 315

    Centzon Mimixcoa, 32, 33, 37, 46, 51, 55

    Centzon Totochtin, 42, 43, 52

    Centzon Uitznaua, 32, 71, 243

    Cerro Montoso, 195

    Chac (god), 220, 221, 229, 238, 268, 269

    Chac (priests), 260, 266–270

    Chacnouitan, 205

    Chacula, 302, 309, 311, 315, 317, 320, 365, 367

    Chac Xib Chac, 206

    Chalcatongo, 80, 107

    Chalchiuhtlatonac, 54

    Chalchiuhtlicue, 37, 43, 51, 54, 60, 62, 64, 65

    Chalco, 11, 16, 21–24, 114

    Chalmeca, 66, 92

    Chama, 310

    Champoton, 205, 292

    Chantico, 53, 62

    Chapala, Lake, 6, 189

    Chapultepec, 14, 17, 18, 160

    Chel, 206, 207

    Chiapas, 25, 26, 88, 127, 220, 228, 252, 261, 286, 290, 304, 308,
        309, 312, 365, 366, 368

    chicauaztli, 69, 301

    Chichen Itza, 204–207, 214, 219, 227, 234, 261, 262, 278, 289–291,
        301–303, 310, 319, 320, 322, 324, 328, 331, 333, 334, 336,
        346–351, 355, 359–361, 364, 366

    Chichimec, 5, 7, 12, 16, 18, 19, 23, 25, 28, 29, 32, 38, 43, 44,
        56, 80, 103, 116, 124, 132, 150, 151, 154, 156, 159, 163, 164,
        291, 364, 366

    Chicome Coatl, 38, 39, 40, 44, 49, 67, 70

    Chicomoztoc, 11, 12, 14, 16, 214, 355

    Chiconquauhtli, 16

    Chilan Balam, Books of, 203–205, 214, 218, 233, 256, 257, 358, 359,
        363, 364

    children, 93, 95, 122, 160–163, 262, 270–272, 283, 284, 294

    Chimalpopoca (of Mexico), 20, 81, 111

    Chimalpopoca (of Tlacopan), 24, 26

    chinamitl, 282, 285, 286

    Chinax, 224

    Chiquimula, 308

    chocolate, 155, 298

    Chol, 202

    Cholula, 11, 23, 48, 92, 113, 115, 128, 171, 175, 179, 184, 190,
        191, 193, 194, 197, 198

    chronological systems, 59–65, 76–78, 245–256, 271, 339, 356–364

    chronology, 12, 18–24, 80, 204, 213, 214, 253–255, 259, 339–343,
        345, 347, 349, 351, 358–360, 364, 365

    chultunes, 277, 352

    Cinteotl, 38, 40, 54, 64, 67, 69, 70, 92, 231

    Cipactonal, 10, 49, 59, 224

    Citan Quatu, 212

    Citbolontum, 224

    Citchac Coh, 224, 269

    Citlalicue, 50

    Citlaltonac, 50

    Ciuacoatl (goddess), 33, 48, 54.
      (_See also_ Tonantzin)

    Ciuacoatl (judge), 130

    Ciuapipiltin, 52, 100

    clans. _See_ calpulli _and_ chinamitl

    Clavigero, 17

    clothing, 91, 92, 105, 112, 119, 122–124, 148–150, 152–154, 189,
        261, 296, 297

    Coatlichan, 16, 21, 110

    Coatlicue, 32, 33, 39, 43, 67

    Coban, 194, 312, 314, 315

    Cocomes, 205–207, 275, 279

    Cogolludo, 203, 218, 219, 262, 271, 287

    Colhuacan, 11, 12, 14, 16–19, 33, 43, 53, 110

    Colombia, 40, 58

    Columbus, 203, 288

    confession, 84, 271, 273

    cooking, 155, 157, 298

    Copan, 227, 235, 276, 279, 287, 288, 294, 313, 316–318, 320, 322,
        324, 326, 332, 336–344, 346, 352, 353, 356

    copper, 134, 141, 142, 292, 304, 305

    Cortés, 1, 2, 140–143, 239, 287

    Cotaxtla, 23, 25, 145, 195

    Cotoche, Cape, 292, 300

    couriers, 155, 160

    Coxcoxtli, 19, 110

    Coyoacan, 26, 27, 29, 114, 120

    Coyolxauhqui, 32

    Cozumel, 220, 271

    cranial deformation, 294, 348

    creation-myths, 47, 48, 50, 51, 58, 59, 207, 220, 229, 233, 239,
        243, 244, 257, 272

    cremation, 103–108, 275–278, 367, 369

    Cueravahperi, 37

    Cuernavaca, 6, 22, 24, 88, 171, 245

    Cuicatlan, 58, 189, 192, 194, 195, 369

    Cuilapa, 58

    Cuitlauac, 12, 14, 22, 33, 100

    Curicaveri, 28, 32, 40, 45

    Curinguaro, 33

    currency, 129, 142, 275, 287


    dancing, 74, 168, 300

    “dawn,” 10, 208, 212, 363, 365

    day-signs, 59–61, 245–249

    death, 81, 102, 275

    deluge, 51, 58, 239

    Diaz, Bernal, 81, 91, 111, 112, 119, 121, 122, 125, 140, 143, 145,
        158, 261, 286, 289, 290, 292, 304

    Diego de Godoi, 289

    divination, 63, 95–99, 160, 259, 267, 272

    divorce, 163, 284–286

    double-headed monster, 232–235, 246

    dramatic performances, 168, 300

    Dresden codex, 232, 255, 257, 261, 265, 266, 290, 343, 362

    Dzahuindanda, 27


    ear-ornaments, 145, 152, 153, 189, 295

    eclipses, 272

    Ecuador, 370

    education, 93, 122, 123, 162, 260, 283, 284

    Eecatl, 47, 221, 226, 246

    Ekchuah, 224, 269, 286

    etzalqualiztli, 68, 93


    feather-work, 29, 145–147, 211

    fire, new, 75, 76, 121, 267, 273

    fishing, 165, 221, 267, 299, 300

    Fleischmann, C., 310

    floating gardens, 165

    food, 129, 154–157, 298, 299, 300

    Francisco de Bologna, 105

    frescoes, 173, 179, 261, 304, 334, 335, 350, 354

    Fuentes, 276

    future life, 102, 231, 232


    Gagavitz, 211, 212, 276

    games. _See_ amusements

    Gann, Dr. T. W., 277

    gold, 129, 134, 142–145, 304, 317

    Gordon, Dr. G. B., 273, 318

    government, 11, 19, 22, 109–120, 205, 209, 212, 260, 278–285, 364

    Grijalva, 144

    Gukumatz (god), 225, 226, 229, 239, 281

    Gukumatz (king), 210, 211


    habitations, 112, 158, 159, 303, 304

    Hacavitz, 220

    hair-dress, 92, 123, 124, 151, 153, 261, 295, 296

    Hawaiki, 215

    Hernandez, 226

    Herrera, 287

    Hobnil, 220, 221, 257, 263, 264, 267, 269

    Holmes, Prof. W. H., 174, 176, 178, 320, 326

    Holon Chantepeuh, 205

    Hozanek, 220, 257, 266

    Htubhtum, 221

    Huaxtec, 6, 12, 14, 22, 25, 36, 43, 44, 47, 48, 66, 81, 97, 108,
        123, 125, 138, 149, 150–152, 171, 181, 182, 195–198, 202, 290,
        294, 295, 303, 309, 342, 356, 367, 368

    Huehuetenango, 308, 320, 335, 351, 352

    Huetzin, 18

    Huilocintla, 83

    Humboldt, A. von, 171

    Hunabku, 227, 229

    Hunac Ceel, 206

    Hunahau, 231

    Hunahpu, (god) 239

    Hunahpu (hero), 231, 239, 240, 241–243, 301, 302

    Hun Batz, 241, 248

    Hun Camé, 232, 241, 242

    Hun Chuen, 241, 248

    Hun Hunahpu, 240, 241, 243, 302

    Hunpiktok, 224

    hunting, 71, 165, 221, 267, 268, 299, 300

    Huntoh (god), 220

    Huntoh (king), 212

    Hunyg, 214

    Hurakan, 229, 239


    idols, 36, 39, 55, 56, 71, 82, 90, 107, 263–266, 268, 271, 273,
        275, 276, 301, 307, 316

    Ilamatecutli, 39, 72

    Ilocab, 207, 208, 209

    inheritance, 111, 114, 115, 163, 278, 283, 300

    installation, 114, 115, 281

    intercalary days, 76, 254

    intoxicants, 42, 91, 132, 155, 156, 243, 248, 267, 269, 298

    Iqi-Balam, 207, 280

    Ixazalvoh, 221, 224

    Ixchebelyax, 221

    Ixchel, 224, 267

    Ixcuina, 44

    Iximché, 203, 304, 337, 352

    Ixkun, 290

    Ixtab, 232

    Ixtlilton, 54, 100

    Ixtlilxochitl (historian), 10, 11, 18

    Ixtlilxochitl (king), 20

    Itzamal, 206, 220, 224, 228

    Itzamatul, 220, 227

    Itzamkab-ain, 233

    Itzamna, 204, 219–221, 224, 227–229, 263–267, 279

    Itzcoatl, 20–22

    Itzcueye, 33

    Itzpapalotl, 33, 52, 61, 62

    Itztlacoliuhqui, 45, 61, 62

    Itztli, 45, 62, 64, 78

    izcalli, 72

    Izquitecatl, 42

    Iztapalapa, 24, 158, 159

    Iztayul, 212, 213, 293


    Jilotepec, 308

    justice, 129–132, 283, 284


    Kabah, 350

    Kabrakan, 239, 240

    Kakchiquel, 202, 203, 207, 208, 210–216, 218–221, 224, 231, 232,
        244, 256, 260, 262, 271, 272, 276, 281, 282, 284–286, 291–293,
        303, 304, 362, 363, 366

    Kanel, 221

    Kanzicnal, 220, 257, 264

    Kinich-Ahau, 220, 224, 227, 228, 264, 266, 267.
      (_See also_ Sun)

    kinship, 163, 164, 284–286

    Kukulkan, 46, 204, 205, 211, 219–221, 224–226, 267, 278, 279, 331,
        335, 353, 365, 366


    Labna, 333, 350, 352

    Lacandons, 202, 272, 273, 285, 286, 364

    La Cueva, 312

    Lahun Noh, 214

    land, 89, 115–117, 132, 282

    Landa, 203, 204, 218, 219, 227, 236, 255, 259, 263, 266, 267, 285,
        291, 294, 295, 300, 304, 307, 316, 331

    La Quemada, 136, 170, 181

    Leon, 276

    lip-ornaments, 105, 119, 127, 145, 152, 153

    Lizana, 258

    Loltun, 294, 317, 352

    “lords of the day,” 64

    “lords of the night,” 64

    Lyobaa. _See_ Mitla


    Macuilxochitl, 42, 54, 221

    magic, 95–101

    maguey, 42, 45, 93, 94, 147, 149, 150, 155–157

    maize, 3, 38, 48, 49, 67, 69, 95, 99, 119, 154, 164, 220, 231, 234,
        243, 244, 272, 275, 298

    Mahucutah, 207, 280

    Malinalco, 12, 14

    Mani, 203, 204, 206, 220, 267

    market, 129

    marriage, 94, 162–164, 260, 280, 284–286, 295

    Matlalcue, 37, 43

    Matlatzinca, 6, 12, 32, 115, 125, 155

    Maudslay, Dr. A. P., 170, 320, 348, 352, 353

    Maxtla, 20, 21

    Mayapan, 205, 206, 219, 220, 226, 267, 278–280, 284, 291, 331, 349,
        366

    Mayauel, 43, 54, 60, 62

    Mazatec, 6, 74

    Mazateca, 74

    medicine, 54, 95, 96, 99–101, 224

    Menché, 228, 261, 263, 288, 295, 320, 322, 324, 328, 334, 338, 340,
        341, 343, 345, 346, 356

    Mendoza codex, 18, 22, 89

    merchants, 54, 105, 126–128, 286, 287

    metal-working, 141–145

    Meztitlan, 113

    Meztli, 52

    Michoacans. _See_ Tarascan

    Mictan Ahau, 231, 266

    Mictlan, 55, 78, 102, 231

    Mictlanciuatl, 50

    Mictlantecutli, 42, 50, 55, 60, 61, 63, 64, 78, 98, 102, 231

    migrations, 9–18, 23–25, 28, 29, 57, 203–206, 208–212, 214–217,
        219, 365–368

    Milnauatl, 43

    Mimixcoa. _See_ Centzon Mimixcoa

    Misantla, 183

    Mitla, 25, 80, 92, 101, 107, 177–179, 183, 197, 320, 331, 332, 335,
        338, 340, 350, 367, 369

    Mitnal, 231, 232

    Mixcoamazatzin, 365

    Mixcoatl, 28, 32, 33, 44–46, 71, 82, 179, 209, 335

    Mixe, 25, 28

    Mixtec, 6, 14, 22–28, 44, 57, 58, 80, 92, 94, 95, 106, 107, 117,
        125, 126, 136, 151, 161, 164, 197, 203, 294, 303, 366, 369

    Moan-bird, 238

    Monte Alban, 88, 174, 175, 183, 192, 320

    Montecuzoma I, 22–24, 159

    Montecuzoma II, 26, 27, 58, 73, 81, 89, 92, 111–113, 133, 140, 143,
        152, 166, 214

    month-signs, 249

    Moon, 42, 43, 51, 52, 166, 227, 243, 272, 311

    Moquiuix, 24, 127

    Morning-star, 208, 226, 258, 362–364.
      (_See also_ Tlauizcalpantecutli)

    mosaic, 29, 38, 46, 125, 134, 141

    Motolinia, 57, 105

    music, 103, 167, 168, 293, 300, 301


    Nacon, 259, 260, 262, 269, 292

    Nacxit, 215

    nagual, 97

    names, 160, 161, 284, 285

    Nanauatzin, 48, 51, 54, 61

    Napatecutli, 149

    Naranjo, 235, 280, 288, 306, 310, 320, 324, 338, 340, 341, 343–346,
        351, 356

    Nautla, R., 6, 195

    Nebaj, 310, 346

    nemontemi days, 63, 72, 95, 361.
      (_See also_ uayeb days)

    New Guinea, 292

    Nezahualcoyotl, 20–22, 24, 81, 131, 158, 159

    Nezahualpilli, 24, 26, 166

    Nicaragua, 310

    Nicatayah, 220

    Nihaib, 207, 220

    Nonoual, 204, 214, 216, 368

    Nonoualca, 7, 211

    Nonoualcat. _See_ Nonoual

    Nopaltzin, 17, 18, 103

    nose-ornaments, 44, 52, 115, 228, 295

    numerical system, 86, 87, 174, 249, 250, 287, 365


    Oappatzan, 166

    Oaxaca, 25, 79, 119, 126, 129, 140, 142, 174, 177, 179, 180, 183,
        184, 190–192, 197, 198, 217, 303, 317, 351, 352, 356, 361, 366,
        368

    ochpaniztli, 70

    Ococingo, 312

    octli, 42, 70, 91, 97, 132, 155–157.
      (_See also_ intoxicants)

    Olmec, 7, 10, 12, 14, 23, 38, 44, 48, 125, 207, 215, 303, 366

    Omeciuatl, 49

    omens, 65, 72, 95–99, 272

    Ometecutli, 49

    Ome Tochtli, 42

    Opochtli, 37, 165

    ordeals, 115, 241, 242, 302

    orientation, 170, 172, 177, 179, 180, 337, 341, 352

    Otomi, 5, 6, 11, 16, 24, 32, 53, 104, 149–152, 154, 155, 163–165,
        364

    Otontecutli, 53

    Oxlahuh Tzii, 213

    Oxomoco, 10, 49, 59, 224


    painting, 150, 154, 261, 295

    Palenque, 228, 229, 231, 234, 237, 238, 254, 257, 279, 287, 304,
        307, 310, 320, 322, 324, 328, 331, 333, 336–338, 340, 342–346,
        353, 359

    panquetzaliztli, 71

    Panuco R., 3, 6, 10, 22, 26, 138, 182, 342, 367

    Papaloapan R., 195, 211, 214

    Papantla, 6, 182

    Pasion, Rio de la, 202

    Patecatl, 43, 61, 62

    patolli, 167

    Paxil, 243

    Paynal, 32, 71

    Pazcuaro, L., 6, 28, 29, 37, 56, 180, 189

    Peabody Museum, 352

    penitential rite, 82–84, 91, 93, 128, 263, 295

    period-signs, 251, 252.
      (_See also_ day-signs _and_ month-signs)

    Peru, 57, 58, 102, 117, 168, 180, 184, 192, 197, 226, 229, 273,
        308, 331, 336, 369, 370

    Peten, 298, 308

    Piedras Negras, 227, 261, 288, 320, 324, 330, 334, 338, 339, 342,
        343, 346, 356, 368, 370

    Pilzintecutli, 42

    Pipil, 202, 203

    Pizlimtec, 221

    Placeres del Oro, 107, 180, 369

    Pochotl, 16, 19

    Pokomam, 207, 315

    Pokonchi, 207

    Popol Vuh, 203, 209, 215, 218, 226, 232, 239, 243, 244, 262, 280,
        281, 292, 301–303, 363

    pottery, 119, 148, 157, 179, 184, 198, 277, 308–318, 369

    Prescott, W. H., 1, 112

    priests, 11, 66, 68, 90–101, 109–111, 209, 259–262, 270–272, 275,
        276, 279–281

    pulque. _See_ octli

    punishments, 93, 130–132, 162, 260, 283, 284


    Quaquapitzauac, 19, 110, 127

    Quauhtlatoa, 21, 24

    Quauhtitlan, 113, 126

    Quauhtitlan, Annals of, 11, 12, 18, 80

    quauhxicalli, 66

    Quaxolotl, 53

    quecholli, 71, 73

    Quen Santo, 36, 276, 309

    Quetzalcoatl, 11, 46–51, 56, 59, 62, 92, 93, 95, 110, 111, 141,
        161, 166, 171, 204, 210, 215, 219–221, 225, 331, 365, 366

    Quetzaltenango, 203

    Quicab, 210, 213

    Quiché, 202, 203, 207–216, 218–221, 224, 225, 229, 231, 239, 248,
        260, 262, 276, 280–282, 284, 286, 287, 291–293, 304, 310, 362,
        363, 366

    Quiengola, 27, 36, 175, 183, 302, 352

    Quilaztli, 33.
      (_See also_ Ciuacoatl _and_ Tonantzin)

    Quinatzin, 19, 103

    Quirigua, 234, 235, 254, 270, 279, 287, 296, 306, 320, 324,
        338–340, 342, 343, 346, 348, 353


    Rabinal, 208, 210, 211, 220, 335, 352, 363

    Ranchito de las Animas, 195

    Ruatan, 288


    Sacchana, 276, 351

    sacrifice, 11, 37–40, 44, 51–53, 65–73, 75, 77, 78, 80, 81, 88,
        102, 103, 121, 131, 132, 208–210, 212, 241–243, 259, 261–263,
        265, 269, 281, 293, 355

    Sacrificios I., 193, 194, 309–311, 314, 317, 318

    Sahagun, 10, 18, 19, 48, 57, 62, 63, 65, 72, 76, 84, 90, 91, 97,
        100, 103, 127, 145, 148, 151, 152, 156, 161, 162, 170, 179, 307

    salt, 155, 282, 283, 286

    Sandoval, 81

    San Isidro, 183

    San Salvador, 243, 308

    Santa Cruz Quiché, 203

    Santa Lucia Cozumalhuapa, 367

    Santa Rita, 320, 334, 350, 366, 367

    Santa Rosa Xlabpak, 331

    Sayil, 320, 333, 338, 350

    Schellhas, Dr. P., 221, 227, 228, 230, 231

    sculpture, 136–140, 173–177, 306, 307, 328, 338–346, 348, 353, 354,
        356.
      (_See also_ stone-working)

    Seibal, 320, 337, 338, 341, 343, 346, 351

    Seler, Prof. E., 14, 65, 76, 113, 145, 166, 221, 238, 245, 248,
        308, 351, 361

    Sicuirancha, 28

    “sky-bar,” 235, 236, 246, 313, 338

    slaves, 132, 133, 283, 286, 293

    Soconusco, 11, 24, 26, 119, 286, 367

    sorcery, 97, 98, 106, 131

    Sotuta, 206

    souls, 51, 79, 80, 93, 96, 100, 102–106, 231, 232

    Spinden, Dr. H. J., 320, 324, 352, 353

    spinning, 147, 148, 186, 189

    steam-bath. _See_ temazcalli

    stilts, 265, 266

    stone-working, 134–136, 140, 141, 178, 179, 305, 306, 331, 332,
        338, 340, 343, 344.
      (_See also_ sculpture)

    Strebel, Dr. H., 195

    Sun, 31, 44, 50–52, 66, 73, 76, 81, 85, 93, 102, 208, 228, 229,
        233, 234, 240, 243.
      (_See also_ Kinich Ahau _and_ Tonatiuh)


    Tatan Bak, 231

    Tatan Holon, 231

    tatu, 151, 295

    Tabai, 221

    Tabasco, 7, 11, 127, 128, 139, 205, 216, 220, 228, 286, 287, 291,
        299, 303, 315, 367

    Tamoanchan, 10, 12

    Tampico, 368

    Tamub, 207, 208

    Tapcu Oloman, 207, 211, 215

    Taras, 28

    Tarascan, 6, 10, 11, 14, 16, 28, 32, 33, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45,
        47, 53, 56, 79, 92, 93, 96, 98, 103, 105, 108, 111, 113, 114,
        122, 124, 126, 132, 136, 141, 142, 149, 150, 151, 154, 157,
        159, 161, 163, 180, 181, 188, 189, 197, 308, 318, 368, 370

    Teayo, 171, 181, 346, 356

    Techotlala, 19, 20

    Tecociztecatl, 51, 52

    Tecomastlahuaca, 58

    Tecpan Guatemala, 203

    tecuiluitontli, 68

    Tehuacan, 3, 11, 14, 29, 78, 92, 356

    Tehuantepec, 24, 25, 27, 28, 127, 145, 175, 194, 286

    Telleriano-Remensis codex, 88

    Telpochcalli, 45, 122, 123, 162

    temazcalli, 38, 101, 160

    Tenango, 356

    Tenayocan, 16–18, 21, 141

    teocalli, The great, 26, 88, 170

    Teotihuacan, 11, 36, 51, 88, 103, 172–174, 183, 187–189, 193, 197,
        198, 318, 320, 356, 365

    Teotitlan, 3, 6, 11, 14, 25, 36, 58, 78, 88, 191, 193, 194, 197,
        198, 228, 366

    teotleco, 70, 268

    Teozapotlan, 25, 27, 28

    Tepanec, 11, 12, 16, 19, 20, 21, 53, 110, 366

    tepeiluitl, 71, 73

    Tepepul, 213, 293

    Tepeuh, 212

    Tepeuh Oloman. _See_ Tapcu Oloman

    Tepeyollotl, 55, 60, 62, 64

    Tepictoton, 37

    teponaztli, 167

    Tepoztecatl, 43, 171

    Tepoztlan, 22, 43, 171, 176

    Teteoinnan, 38, 39, 43, 44, 46, 50, 54, 70, 95, 100

    Texolo, 183

    Tezcatlipoca, 40, 43–45, 47, 49, 50, 54, 55, 61, 68, 70, 71, 84,
        99, 114, 122, 133, 141, 166, 171

    Tezcatzoncatl, 42

    Tezcoco, 11, 14, 17, 19, 20, 22, 26, 81, 89, 111, 114, 120, 121,
        131, 158

    Tezozomoc (historian), 215

    Tezozomoc (king), 19, 21

    Thomas, Dr. C., 202

    Thompson, E. H., 352

    Ticatamé, 28

    Tihax, 224

    Tihoo, 220

    Tikal, 234, 288, 307, 316, 320, 322, 324, 326, 328, 330, 336–343,
        345, 346, 351

    Tikoch, 206

    Tilantongo, 25

    Tiripemé, 45

    tititl, 72

    Tizoc, 25, 88

    Tlacateotl, 20

    tlacaxipeualiztli, 65, 100, 262

    Tlacochcalcatl, 113, 121

    Tlacolula, 175, 178, 180

    Tlacopan, 21, 24, 26, 53, 114, 120, 121, 131

    Tlahuicol, 81

    Tlalhuica, 6, 14, 40, 119, 126, 151, 171, 176, 361

    Tlaloc, 36–38, 40, 43, 48, 51, 54, 55, 60–62, 64, 65, 67, 68,
        71–73, 78, 80, 90, 102, 108, 114, 141, 170, 188, 191, 220, 221,
        229, 233, 332

    Tlalocan, 36, 55, 78, 102, 105

    Tlaloque, 36, 37, 68, 149, 165, 220

    Tlaltecutli, 52

    Tlaltelolco, 18–20, 24, 56, 105, 110, 120, 127, 129, 170, 171

    Tlamatzincatl, 46

    Tlauizcalpantecutli, 33, 54, 62, 76, 77, 78, 82, 171.
      (_See also_ Morning-star)

    Tlaxcala, 7, 11, 14, 21, 23, 26, 32, 37, 38, 40, 48, 57, 66, 70,
        83, 95, 96, 113–115, 121, 122, 126, 138, 139, 155, 190, 191,
        197, 348

    tlaxochimaco, 69

    tlaxtli, 42, 165, 166, 170, 241, 242, 281, 301–303, 335, 336, 367

    Tlazolteotl, 38, 44, 45, 52, 61, 62, 64, 66, 84, 95

    Tlotzin, 18

    tobacco, 92, 112, 122, 156, 157, 300

    Tohil, 208, 219, 220, 262, 281

    Tolgom, 212

    Toltec, 7–12, 16, 23, 25, 28, 29, 46–49, 80, 104, 109, 110, 141,
        150, 172, 175, 176, 188, 197, 215, 216, 219, 226, 291, 302,
        349–351, 354, 358, 365–367

    Toluca, 24, 25, 97, 154, 155

    Tonacaciuatl, 49

    Tonacatecutli, 49, 55, 60, 62, 103, 219

    Tonacatepetl, 243

    tonalamatl, 62, 95, 245, 271, 272, 363, 364

    Tonantzin, 33, 248.
      (_See also_ Ciuacoatl)

    Tonatiuh, 50, 62, 64, 73, 78, 229, 233.
      (_See also_ Sun)

    tooth-mutilation, 151, 195, 228, 294, 316, 367

    Topiltzin, 19, 46

    Torquemada, 11, 287

    Totochtin. _See_ Centzon Totochtin

    Totonac, 6, 14, 23, 29, 38, 82, 83, 91, 92, 108, 119, 138, 140,
        144, 150–152, 181–184, 190, 191, 193–198, 202, 211, 294, 295,
        307, 315, 317, 318

    Totoquiuatzin I, 21, 24

    Totoquiuatzin II, 26

    toxcatl, 68, 151

    Tozi. _See_ Teteoinnan

    tozoztontli, 67

    Tozzer, Dr. A. M., 322

    trade, 126–130, 184, 190, 286, 287

    trees of the quarters, 79, 231, 234, 257

    tribute, 22, 118, 119, 124, 140, 141, 147, 190, 278–283, 293

    Troano-Cortesianus codex, 218, 255, 265, 266

    Tukuchi, 211, 213, 256, 363

    Tulan, 8, 11, 12, 16, 18, 19, 47, 49, 96, 137, 176, 179, 180, 183,
        204, 208, 209, 210, 214–216, 219, 262, 280, 291, 303, 328, 336,
        348, 355, 356, 360, 366

    Tulanzinco, 11, 23

    Tulan Zuiva. _See_ Zuiva

    Tulum, 320, 349, 351, 359

    Tutul Xiu, 203–207, 214, 216, 278, 291, 349, 358–360, 368

    Tuxpan, 23, 26, 171, 216

    Tuxtla, 203

    Tzapotlatenan, 54, 100

    Tzental, 220, 224, 225, 271

    Tzintzuntzan, 40, 150

    Tziquinaha, 208, 281

    Tzitzimimé, 52, 55, 74

    Tzitzipu, 29

    tzompantli, 171

    Tzontecomatl, 16, 19

    Tzutuhil, 202, 210–212, 284, 363


    Uac Mitun Ahau, 231.
      (_See also_ Mictan Ahau)

    uayeb days, 249, 263, 265, 361.
      (_See also_ nemontemi days)

    uei tecuiluitl, 69, 152

    uei tozoztli, 67

    Ueuecoyotl, 60, 62

    Uexotzinco, 11, 12, 21, 23, 26, 32, 48, 66, 113, 115, 123, 126

    Uitziliuitl, 20

    Uitzilopochtli, 12, 26, 27, 32, 33, 37, 44, 45, 48, 49, 51, 62, 65,
        68–72, 81, 82, 88, 90, 113, 114, 124, 125, 147, 166, 170, 171,
        220, 243

    Uitznaua. _See_ Centzon Uitznaua

    Uixtociuatl, 43, 46, 68

    Ulil, 206

    Uloa, R., 273, 276, 286, 294, 309, 310, 313, 315, 318

    Urendequa Vecara, 33

    Usumacinta R., 200, 202, 211, 214, 216, 287, 299, 320

    Utatlan, 203, 304, 337, 352

    Uxmal, 205, 272, 317, 320, 326, 349, 350, 356


    Valdivia, 262

    Vaticanus A codex, 62, 104

    Vaticanus B., codex, 234

    Venus. _See_ Morning-star

    Vera Cruz, 2, 3, 6, 26, 119, 127, 128, 132, 140, 145, 182, 193,
        217, 303, 307, 367.
      (_See also_ Sacrificios I. _and_ Totonac)

    Votan, 220

    Vukubatz, 212

    Vukub Camé, 232, 241, 243

    Vukub Hunahpu, 240, 243, 302

    Vukub Kakix, 239, 240


    war, 66, 77, 90, 96, 103, 106, 109, 110, 120–127, 131, 153, 168,
        224, 228, 229, 259, 260, 262, 269, 283, 287–293, 337, 364

    weapons, 16, 82, 124, 125, 136, 165, 206, 211, 216, 279, 280,
        287–292, 348

    weaving, 147–149, 307, 308

    world-directions, 78, 179, 180, 241, 256, 257

    writing, 86–89, 258


    Xahila, 203, 211, 212, 282

    Xahila, Annals of, 210–215, 218, 281, 291, 363

    Xaltocan, 14, 16, 17

    Xaratanga, 40

    Xbalanque, 231, 239–243, 301, 302

    Xcacau, 221

    Xibalba, 208, 210, 220, 231, 232, 241–243, 257, 272, 302, 303

    Xicalanca, 7, 14, 23, 205

    Xico, 88, 356

    Xilonen, 38, 39, 46, 69

    Xipe, 39, 40, 54, 61, 62, 65, 67, 100, 114, 131, 224

    Xiuhtecutli, 53, 61, 64, 69, 70, 72, 78, 84

    Xmukané, 224, 239, 240, 241, 243

    Xochbitum, 221

    Xochicalco, 88, 176, 177, 180, 183, 191, 197, 346, 356, 361

    Xochimilco, 12, 14, 17, 22, 23, 33, 38, 114, 126, 141

    Xochipilli, 42, 61, 69, 137, 166, 221, 249

    Xochiquetzal, 40, 42, 46, 49, 54, 61, 62, 149, 166, 221

    xocouetzi, 69

    Xolotl (god), 48, 51, 52, 62

    Xolotl (king), 16–19, 36, 103, 116

    Xoxo, 151, 175, 192

    Xpiyakok, 224, 239, 240, 243

    Xquik, 241

    Xtoh, 221


    yacata, 180

    Yacatecutli, 54, 70, 126, 128, 224

    Yaqui, 207, 213, 262

    Yaxkokahmut, 227

    Yoaltecutli, 50

    Yoalticitl, 50

    “yokes,” 138

    Yucatan, 199, 200, 202–204, 218, 219–221, 226–229, 231, 237, 244,
        252, 256, 257, 259, 261, 262, 269, 270, 272, 273, 277, 278,
        282, 286, 290–297, 299, 303–305, 307, 309, 314, 317, 319, 320,
        324, 326, 328, 332, 333, 336–338, 346–352, 356, 359, 366, 367


    Zacapu, 28

    Zacatecas, 6

    Zactecauh, 211, 212

    Zaczini, 220, 257, 266

    Zamaneb, 208, 363

    Zapotec, 6, 10, 16, 24–28, 36, 39, 57, 58, 80, 88, 92, 101,
        106–108, 125, 126, 142, 144, 150, 151, 173–175, 177, 178, 192,
        193, 197, 203, 221, 228, 245, 246, 248, 302, 303, 314, 336,
        360, 361, 369, 370

    Zipakna, 239, 240, 243

    Zociyoeza, 27

    Zociyopi, 27

    Zoque, 25

    Zotziha Chimalcan, 220, 232

    Zotzil, 211, 212, 282, 363

    Zuiva, 204, 208, 211, 214, 215

    Zuhuykak, 224

    Zuhuyzip, 221


          PRINTED BY WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD., PLYMOUTH

  [Illustration:

  Maxico and Central America]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] A word of explanation should be said concerning the Mexican
language. Like other American tongues its structure is such
that long compound words and names are built up of significant
elements, many of them being thus equivalent to a whole sentence.
The practice is not unknown in this country, for is not “Obadiah
Bind-their-kings-in-chains-and-their-nobles-in-links-of-iron”
familiar to every reader of Macaulay? At the same time it adds
considerable difficulty to the study of Mexican archæology. As regards
pronunciation, the chief points to be noted are as follows: X is always
pronounced as SH and J as H; C is always hard except before E and I; CH
is sounded as the CH in CHILD; Z as in ZEBRA.

In Maya we find a happy tendency to monosyllables. X again is
pronounced as SH; but C is always hard.

[2] Sahagun states that this prince came to the throne in 1489, but the
Codex Telleriano-Remensis assigns that year to his death.

[3] This is according to Sahagun’s statement; at the present time
in the valley of Mexico the rains commence in May-June and end in
September-October.

[4] At this point the Kakchiquel annals prove a useful check upon the
account given by the Popol Vuh. Tepepul and Iztayul, according to
the latter, preceded Quicab, and Quicab was succeeded by Tepepul and
Xtayub. It is evident that some duplication has taken place in the
Quiché legend, that Tepepul and Iztayul are the same as Tepepul and
Xtayub, and that they succeeded Quicab.

[5] The very early dates which occur at Palenque, a late site, must be
themselves artificial or mythical, and so too, I believe, are the dates
which occur on the celebrated Leiden plate and Tuxtla figure.

[6] By an error the katun number has been drawn as two bars and three
dots, instead of three bars.

[7] There is a wall-painting at Chichen Itza which seems to picture a
human sacrifice, but this is on a building which undoubtedly belongs to
a later period, when the Maya had already come in contact with Mexican
influences, as will be seen later.

[8] One of these was also found by Maudslay, near Quirigua.

[9] The corners of the Castillo at Chichen Itza also appear to have
been slightly rounded and not square, as shown in Fig. 73, _f_; p.
321.

[10] The qualification is necessary, since Tulum appears to have been
inhabited at the conquest.

[11] The use of the rising of the morning star to commence a solar
time-count would explain the peculiar fact that the commencement of the
year never coincided with that of the tonalamatl. It has been stated
(p. 77) that the initial days of the Venus-periods were cipactli,
coatl, atl, acatl, and olin; cipactli being the initial day also of the
tonalamatl. But the day acatl was not only one of the initial days of
the 365-day year, but was the initial day also of the Mexican double
cycle of 104 years, which was in addition the initial day of a complete
cycle of Venus-periods. The conclusion is tempting, that after the
invention of the tonalamatl, correlated with the observation of the
planet Venus, a change was made to solar time as near as it could be
observed. As a starting-point for the new system, the next heliacal
rising of the planet was awaited, and this occurring on an acatl day
fixed the “year-bearers” as acatl, tecpatl, calli, and tochtli. It will
be remembered that the Mexicans believed that the historical sun rose
on the day 13. acatl (p. 73). At any rate, the Venus-period seems to
form a link between the tonalamatl and the year of 365 days. The fact
that none of the gods of the hunting-tribes find a place among the
deities presiding over the tonalamatl would seem sufficient proof that
the Chichimec, Aztec, and Otomi had no hand in its invention.


Transcriber’s Notes:

1. Obvious printers’, punctuation and spelling errors have been
corrected silently.

2. Where hyphenation is in doubt, it has been retained as in the
original.

3. Some hyphenated and non-hyphenated versions of the same words have
been retained as in the original.

4. Italics are shown as _xxx_.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74836 ***
